
Relax and reflect on these thoughts:
What am I thinking right now: it could be about work, about
family, about friends, about myself. Let me look at my thoughts
look at myself during the whole day: driving to work, reaching
my desk, interacting with people I am doing everything but
I am choosing what to do and I am choosing how to be while
I am doing it I have a choice how to feel while I am doing
everything I am doing outside.... Situations, targets, goals,
people - they are all external.... Let me look at myself how I
think, how I feel, and then how I respond... I's my choice
I am the creator of my response. Om Shanti!
MANTRAS FOR HAPPINESS UNLIMITED
Happiness is not dependent on physical objects.
.
: Objects, possessions, gadgets, etc, are designed to give
us comfort.
Physical comfort is different from emotional comfort.
Happiness is our internal creation and can be created
irrespective of external comforts
We use objects as a stimulus to create a response, but the
response is our choice. Different people create different
responses using the same stimulus
.
. Problems will come, challenges will be there, but to
despair or deal with them is our choice

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


SS: Relax and reflect on these thoughts:
Let us sit back and look at the journey of our life aims,
objectives, achievements... milestones to cover. that is my
journey... Let me look at myself on the journey the traveller
with the changed consciousness. Happiness is not at the
destination happiness is my state of being on the journey. I
am happy... stable .. in control.. powerful while I am on
the journey... There are obstacles on the way but my first
responsibility is to take care of my state of being of the way
I respond. . This is my responsibility. Om Shanti!
MANTRAS FOR HAPPINESS UNLIMITED
. Happiness is a state of being: created while working
towards the goal, not a feeling to be experienced after
achieving the goal.
. If we believe that happiness is experienced after
achievement, then we create stress, anger and fear
while trying to achieve it. Thus we ultimately do not
experience happiness.
Before I take responsibility of those around me, I need
to take responsibility for my own thinking and feelings.
When I am happy and take care of others, then they
will be happy.
You cannot make your child emotionally strong without
being emotionally strong yourself

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


SS: Relax and reflect on these thoughts
Let us sit back and be comfortable I look at myself.I,
the creator of every thought and feeling . There are pressures
in life targets to achieve deadlines to meet It's just a
pressure. I am the one who is going to achieve the target
let me take care of myself as I work towards achieving the target
. The quality of my thoughts and felings as I move towards
the target .. any fear any anxiety any worry.. let me
first sit back and change the quality of the thought I am a
powerfiul being I can achieve what I have decided but I
will first take care of myself... Nothing and no one can influence
my state of being .. It's totally in my control I, the powerful
being protected and secure.. now move towards my target.
This is my journey, a journey of happiness. Om Shantil
MANTRAS FOR HAPPINESS UNLIMITED
. Stress is a pain that comes to make us realise that there
is something I need to change.
.Stress is our creation of negative thoughts, which has
an effect on our efficiency, memory power, decision
power and, hence, our performance
Stress has an impact on our physical and emotional
well-being, and hence, any amount of stress is damaging
Targets, pressures, deadlines, exams, etc., are natural
but stress is our choice.
. Stress = pressure + resilience, that is, inner strength. My
first responsibility in any situation is to first take charge
of my state of mind because that is the only thing which
is in my control

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


SS: Relax and reflect on these thoughts.
Relax and reflect on these thoughts. Meditate.
Let me look at the people around me my friends
family, and my immediate relationships.. Everyone
me at home and at work .. doing and being exactly the way
they think is right Their behaviour and their words are the
stimulus thats coming from outside I, the being, choose my
response My response is not automated... it's not in their
control... it's my choice Let me look at myself with them
they are behaving in a manner that I think is not right...
Now let me look at myself. in control...in charge not of
them not of the situation but of my state of mind I am
creating the right thought at the right time . I am the master
an independent
powerful being. Om Shanti
MANTRAS FOR HAPPINESS UNLIMITED
. Our belief systems decide our way of living; we need to
experiment with what we are learning in order to
to
change our old belief systems
.
. I don't want peace. I am peace. Now I will be at peace and do things outside.

Try a new belief system. Experiment with it. When you experience the result, it becomes the truth

Every act I do, I will do it with the awareness that I
am a peaceful being.

Unlimited Happiness is not dependent on people, objects
or situations; no one can make me happy and I can't
make others happy, till they want it themselves.
No one is responsible for my hurt, pain, fear, or anger
It is my own creation in response to their behaviour,
and I have another choice. The choice to be happy.
.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


Relax and Reflect on these thoughts. Meditate.
Let's look at ourselves tomorrow at work.. whatever the
situation may be .. I am not blaming anyone I am not
going to hold anyone responsible for how I feel. because l
understand that I am the creator just when my mind is
about to say it's because of them... let me just stop and look
at myself .. do I have a choice to respond in another way..
what's my nature, my personality let it not get influenced by
the behaviours and personalities of others .. I am the radiator
of my qualities irrespective of whatever happens around me...
This is self-responsibility... Om Shanti!
MANTRAS FOR HAPPINESS UNLIMITED
. My response to people should be based on my
personality, not on the behaviour of others.
The way we think and behave, is not for other people.
It is first for ourselves because we are the first ones to
experience it.
Let us take charge of our mind, instead of trying to
control others and thinking that if they change then
my mind will be in control.
.Let us choose how we want to think, feel and be in
every relationship. We have always tried to make others
happy because we thought when they would be happy,
I will be happy too.
When we do something for others, let us first understand
that we chose to do it because they matter to us and we
are doing it for ourselves. Only then will we be happy
Taking our mind off from problems by watching
television, going shopping and other distractions is only
a temporary deviation from the pain; it is not happiness
because the healing has not happened.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

MANTRAS FOR HAPPINESS UNLIMITEID

Our personality is a combination of five types of
sanskars - personality traits.

Some sanskars we get from our parents and other family
members. We call these hereditary sanskars because
we are within the influence of their vibrations.

There are sanskars we create because of our environment
our nationality, religion, culture and friends.

A very important set of sanskars are those that we carry
from our past birth. Our soul carries its personality
traits created in one costume to the next costume.

We create the fourth type of sanskars through our
own will power. Everyone has the same amount of
will power; it just depends on realising that we have
will power and then using it favourably.

The fifth set of sanskars are the original sanskars of every
every
soul, these being purity, peace, love, bliss, knowledge
power and truth.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Relax and Reflect on these thoughts. Meditate.
Let me just sit back, relax, and really look at my mind now, No one will come to know that I am looking. It's something that
goes on inside. And I am going to do it the whole day, while
I am working, while I am talking, while I am driving, while I am 
walking; it's about just being aware of my thoughts.
My thoughts, my creation something that I thought was
happening automatically.. I now realise the seed is me .. I am
the creator of every thought .. every thought has an influence
on my body . and on everyone around me... .Let me look at
my thoughts .. flowing beautifully in control because I
realize I am the master.... Whatever happens around me 
pleasant or not so nice.. whatever anyone may do or say
however anyone may behave I just sit back and look at my
thoughts and gradually channelise the thoughts into a different
direction because I am the master and the creator.... I turn
the focus from outside to inside .. because I understand now
that the energy flows from inside me to everyone outside.... So I am doing everything outside but my attention is on what I am
creating inside .. because what I create inside naturally flows
outside... I am honest with myself .. honest in my thoughts
words and actions and there is absolute harmony. This is
trust... I trust myself I love myself .. because I am a pure
being... Om Shanti!MANTRAS FOR HAPPINESS UNLIMITED
Self-awareness means to just watch my thoughts, to be
able to see what I am thinking and to be aware that I
am the creator of these thoughts.
. Next step is to check whether this thinking is the right
kind of thinking for me.
. We create 25 to 30 thoughts per minute that is, 40
to 50 thousand thoughts in a day. Thoughts are the
most powerful source of energy that we have, so lets
be careful about how we use them.
. There are four types of thoughts. One type of thought
is pure: powerful, positive and selfless; another type is
negative thoughts of ego and anger that create hatred
resentment, fear, rejection, or criticism.
. Next are necessary thoughts that are thoughts related
to action; these are neutral thoughts, yet they can be
pre-cursors to negative thoughts
The fourth type of thought is waste thoughts, which are
thoughts about the past or the future - both not in our
control, and so a waste of time and energy.


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


SS: Relax and Reflect on these thoughts. Meditate.
Let me just look at myself... I, my own friend, honest with
myself... Let me look at the various reactions I give to other
people during the day . Anger jealousy criticism
hatred .. seemed to be normal in return for what they have
done to me.... But now I need to stop and ask myself... who
am I giving it to.... It's a creation that I experience first it's
an energy that I am feeding to my own mind... Let me stop
and ask myself who is the one who is hurting me who
is the one who is creating the pain . I have a choice.. I the 
pure and peaceful being .. the actor playing so many different
roles with other actors.. each one playing their role.. I the 
actor remember my true personality.. the pure being .
play every act and every role with the awareness of my original
personality.. Look at yourself... that pure being as the parent
the friend.. the boss.. Everywhere I go... its me... the
pure being. Om Shanti!
MANTRAS FOR HAPPINESS UNLIMITED
.If we change our thoughts, our words and actions too
will change. Hence, personality transformation begins
with our thoughts.
.When we interact with people, let us interact with the
soul, the pure being, rather than the acquired body,
positions and achievements. When we talk through the
consciousness of our acquired labels, then it is the ego
of one talking to the ego of the other.
In any situation, we are playing our role along with so
many actors. Let us stop writing their script because
they are not in our control. Instead let us write only
our script. When we keep thinking of what others are
doing, we are only depleting our own energy.


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


Relax and Reflect on these thoughts. Meditate.
My life .. my journey.... I am writing the script as I
create every thought... I am writing my own destiny. let
me be aware that no situation is happening on its own .. I
have written my destiny.... Whatever is happening to me now
. I had written the script for it much earlier.... What I am
doing now... what I think now I am writing my script for
my present and for my fiuture... The control the power is
totally with me.... Let me be awake and aware that I am the
scriptwriter of my destiny.. I the powerful being.... I am not
influenced by situations and people focus and attention on
my thoughts manifesting into my destiny. Om Shanti!
MANTRAS FOR HAPPINESS UNLIMITED
. If other people are behaving in a reactive manner, at
that time for me to remain stable internally, is strength
and hence peace is strength not weakness.
Anger is not strength.It is a sign that I have lost control
.
of myself. Even hurt, resentment, are silent forms of
anger, and damage me of the creator.
My every THOUGHT is followed by a FEELING. So if
I am not feeling nice, I have to stop and check - what
have I been thinking
My feelings  a period of time, created on the basis
on my thoughts, develop my ATTITUDE- about people,
situations, work or about the world.
My attitude comes out into ACTION. Any action done
repeatedly becomes my HABIT. All my habits put
together is my PERSONALITY. At every step in life
this PERSONALITY determines my DESTINY.
I the being am an embodiment of 7 qualities - Purity,
Peace, Love, Bliss, Knowledge, Power and Truth.
.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


SS: Relax and Reflect on these thoughts.
This body is my costume it is just a machine.... I am the
controller and the operator of this machine.... Consciousness
energy... the spiritual being... my original sanskar is purity,
peace and happiness.... Let me look at myself...consciousness atthe centre of the forehead... the operator sitting there taking
charge of this machine .. playing roles.. relationships and
responsibilities.... I the human being doing action but as
do I express what i am... Let me look at myself driving to
work .. at office with my colleagues at home with my friends
and family with the awareness.. I am a pure being doing
things interacting with people.... and thereby expressing and
experiencing my original sanskar of peace and happiness.... Let
me see how the day will be. Om Shanti!
MANTRAS FOR HAPPINESS UNLIMITED
. People predicting our future are only telling us a
probability. It is only a probability, not a reality.
. We have the power to listen to the prediction and still
choose our response - that is, our thoughts and actions
and thereby create a reality based on our choice.
We always think that we need to do things outside to
change the way we feel inside. The reality is we need to
change how we feel inside to change the things outside.
. Happiness is not something that we should expect to
get from other people - it is to be created within and
shared with people we meet.
. We are not 'human doings' doing things to be at peace;
we are 'human beings' at peace and doing things.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

SS: Relax and Reflect on these thoughts
Let's sit back, with the body relaxed.... Just before going
to sleep let me look at the day.... An entire movie has
passed scene after scene. with lots of actors around me acting
according to their scripts.... Let me not get entangled in the
situation... Let me just watch myself playing the role as a
detached observer.... I will just focus on my performance let
me not look at the other actors in the scene .. no judgement
or comment.... I am looking at myself my response and my
script in every scene.... As a detached observer let me ask myself
was there any scene that I could have performed differently...
Did I have another choice to the way I was writing my script
? Let me play the scene again on the screen of my mind
same scene but a different me.. with a different script... I
am programming my mind and preparing my mind to a more
powerful and a positive response for the next day.... Om Shanti!
MANTRAS FOR HAPPINESS UNLIMITED
. People say when angry, count one to ten; these are
external measures to postpone our reactions. However,
if we take care of our thoughts we will not create even
the thought of anger.
Our thoughts are created based on our past experiences
and the information that we take in through our sense
organs.
.During the first few hours in the morning, the power of
the mind to absorb information is very high. We need to
take care of the quality of information we take in then.
To protect ourselves from creating negative thoughts, we
need to avoid newspapers or news channels or anything
that has some disturbing information to offer early in
the morning.
. Let me try a new way of living, to be able to create
pure, powerful, positive thoughts naturally. Let me begin
the day with a few minutes of reading or listening to
pure and pleasant information
. The last layer of information at night influences the
quality of my thoughts while sleeping. So let's finish the day with a few minutes of reading or listening to pure and pleasant information.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Relax and Reflect on these thoughts. Meditate.
Different people I meet the entire day have different personalities
each one is operating through their belief systems .. their
rights ... their wrongs. their perspectives...
Let me look at myself... through which perspective do I
interact with each individual I meet.... Is it an influence of
their personality... am I changing according to everyone I
meet.. or am I able to hold on to my internal, pure, original
personality...Let me look at myself today the entire day
meeting about twenty people.... Let me see myself with each
one of them... interacting through the core of my personality
my original sanskar of purity and cleanliness.. I the flawless,
perfect, pure being uninfluenced and undisturbed... by
anything and anyone around me. Om Shanti!
MANTRAS FOR HAPPINESS UNLIMITED
There is only one person who knows me well and thats
my own self.
Be 'in-dependent': dependent only on that one who is
inside; because outside things will change and they have
a reason for changing.
Our thoughts are created based on past experiences, the
information we take in and most important our belief
systems
.
Its important to take charge of how we feel, instead
of being dependent on others. To be INDEPENDENT
means to be dependent only on the one inside.
Let us be ourselves and not keep changing our behaviour
according to the way others behave with us.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

SS: Relax and Reflect on these thoughts. Meditate.
Let us sit back and relax preparing myself for a good
sleep.... Let me just look at the day . everything that's passed
is past.. full stop.... However tough . however challenging
it's over.... Now is a new moment a new response
and a new feeling.... I am in control... I am pure energy....I
am already complete beautiful contented... successful.
Everything that I was looking for outside is already there in
me... The purpose of my life is not to achieve it outside but
to express it while I am moving through my goals .. I am the
complete .. perfect. pure being master of the body and
every sense organ everything in control. Om Shanti!
MANTRAS FOR HAPPINESS UNLIMITED
. Every time we think of the past, we are making it the
present because we are creating the same emotions
again.
. The past is passed. Full stop. Let it not repeat in the
mind; when you do, it is like rubbing a wound and
therefore not allowing it to heal.
There is nothing to learn from the situation that
happened. The only thing I need to learn is whether
had the choice of responding in another manner.
The only thing I need to learn from the past is whether
I had the choice of responding in another manner.
. Holding on to the past -  not letting go - will only
create pain within. The situation is the same but the
longer we hold on to it, the pain increases.
. In relationships, no one is ever wrong; each one is right
from their own perspective. Detaching from my own
perspective and understanding the other's perspective
is empathy.
. While working towards our achievements, if we
care not to compromise on our values of peace, love
and happiness, we will be always contented.

