SO: What is the meaning of happiness?
SS: Happiness is the one thing in life that everyone is
looking for, irrespective of what we are doing, what relationships
we have established, what we are trying to achieve, and so on.
If we think about life, clearly all of us are looking for happiness.
SO: We are looking for happiness as you said. But what is
it through which we are looking for it?
SS: We do it through different means - it could be through
possessions, through property, through relationships, through
achievements, through good health. Like, if you ask someone
what they want in life, they often say 'success'. Why they want
success is primarily because it makes them happy. You ask
someone why they want to buy a particular thing. The most
likely response is that it makes them happy or maybe it makes
the family happy. Again you ask someone what they get out
of a relationship? Yet again, the response is often Happiness.
So, finally everyone is looking for that one word - happiness.
SO: But is happiness limited or unlimited? It is limited,
isn't it?
SS: It is. In fact, I don't even know whether it's there
SO: So it is momentary - like a child who plays with a
toy and breaks it, and then wants to try another one, then
another one, and so on. So what are we looking for actually?
If we are looking for happiness, shouldn't it be something
concrete and permanent?
SS: It should be permanent, that's most important. If happiness
is something that I like, if it's something that I desire, and if
comes naturally to me, then it won't be dependent on anything
else outside. If it's dependent on something, then it can never
be constant.
Simply put, if you are looking for it outside somewhere
then you are dependent on that thing and the feeling won't
sustain. Lets say I feel good if the weather is pleasant; my
feeling good is then dependent on the weather
SO: Sure! But what I want to understand is that how can
one have happiness without desires and dependency?
SS: That's probably one of the oldest belief systems we have
allowed ourselves to live by - the belief that happiness is to
be got from the outside, whether it's from achievements or
from people or from what we are. I am doing this so that I
will feel happy' is always the equation. When it's done, and
done in the right way, I will feel happy. So, the dependency
is on the act being performed in the right manner. Right
from when a child is conditioned by the parents to make the
parents feel good when the child gets good marks, when the
child performs well, when the child looks good.
Slowly a child is conditioned to believe that if my parents
feel happy then I will feel happy, and if my parents are not
happy then how can I be happy?
SO: Can you share some easier way or the right way whereby
we can understand the meaning of happiness and understand
how to achieve it without dependency?
SS: First and foremost, let's try and see on what it is dependent.
The simplest dependency that we experience on a daily basis is
on objects. I'll feel happy when I buy a new car; I'll feel happy
when I buy new property; I am happy when I go shopping.
SO: But what is wrong in this? Isn't this natural?
SS: What is more important - Is it true?' Are these dependencies
actually making us happy?
SO: Honestly speaking, I will feel happy if I bought a new car.
SS: Of course you will, but is it the car which is giving you
that happiness, which you are looking for?
I will feel happy when I have a new car . which means
if I don't, then it's a question mark. This also means that 10
days down the line if the car gets a little scratch or a little
bump, my happiness is again going to get affected because I
have conditioned myself into believing that it is the car which
is giving me happiness. Now that is not true. You buy a new
car - the car could be of X amount, or it could be ten times
the X amount; in fact, it could be the most expensive car in
the world. You sit in the car and it very comfortable. So who
is experiencing the comfort? It's the body. It's got excellent
seats, a great music system and a very powerful AC. There
is complete physical comfort. I am comfortablesitting in the
car and so I tell myself that I am feeling good. And just at
that time I get a phone call saying something unpleasant has
happened at home. Will I still be happy?
SO: No.
SS: But I am still comfortable. The car is still there and I
am still in the car. The car was designed to give me physical
comfort and it will give me physical comfort irrespective of
any other life event that I encounter
SO: So, you mean to say that happiness and comfort are
two different things?
SS: Anything that is physical is designed to give me physiceal
comfort. The chair I am sitting on is physical and giving me
physical comfort, but I tell myself that this gives me happiness
SO: Is this a wrong belief that we have?
SS: It's just that we were conditioned to think like this right
from childhood. We have grown up with it. But now we need
to question our belief system.
SO: When we were children our parents would buy something
for us, saying 'we'll buy this for him and make the child
happy or would take us for a picnic to make us feel happy'
So that is the way we got conditioned.
SS: Absolutely. Now I have the best bungalow and the best car,
and I have all possessions I could have dreamed of at home;I
have every gadget that I wanted. Then why am I still looking
for happiness? Shouldn't the search have ended because the
objects are all there at home? Name it and I have it all. But
I seem to be still searching for that feeling, which means the
gadgets are not able to give it to me. What I have got from
the gadgets is a comfortable life.
SO: In the context of the car that you mentioned, the
comfort is also no more there when the phone call says that
something unpleasant has happened at home. So, where is
the comfort here?
SS: Picture yourself sitting in the car, your back straight, and
your legs positioned comfortably. It is the mind that has suddenly
created the pain because of the new information. When the
mind gets uncomfortable, it is mind over matter. When the
mind is in pain, physical comfort is immaterial. The body is
comfortable but 'I' am uncomfortable at that moment.
I am looking for happiness. So, at that moment the physical
comfort does not matter. It could be the other way round too. I may be uncomfortable physically, I may just be sitting
cross-legged on the floor, but internally I feel bliss, and so I
am very comfortable
SO: How does one get there?
SS: One gets there by understanding that physical comfort is
separate from emotional comfort. I was not able to experience
internal comfort - the internal stability that we call happiness,
but I thought that if I am physically comfortable, then that
means I will be happy. Today, we have started to buy happiness
If I buy this, this and this the list is never-ending I will be
happy. This doesn't mean that we don't buy those things, rather
let's not associate them with our being happy. I generally buy
a thing because it's useful, it's comfortable or it's productive
But is it happiness? No!
At least I know why I am buying something; and I don't
tell my mind that when I buy this I will be happy. If I associate
material things with happiness then I am postponing my
happiness and putting a new condition to it. Let's suppose
that I am building a new house and I tell myself that when
this house is built and I shift there, then I will be happy. This
could mean after a year or after two years.
So, again I am postponing my happiness until a future time.
Think of a child - we look at the child in school and say that
childhood is the best phase of life, but the child looks at the
grownups around him and thinks they are so lucky, for they
don't have to do homework or give an exam. He wishes to be
in their place. The child is looking to be out of school so that
he can be happy. He feels he will be very happy when he goes
to a college. Then, when he gets into a college the thought is
redefined. He feels he will be very happy when he gets a job
is married and has a family. But soon, he feels that he will
be very happy when his children are settled. Few years down
the line, the children are settled and everything is fine. What
is the thought now? He feels he will be very happy when he
retires. So, when will he actually be happy? He postponed his
happiness to a different stage of life and every time there was
a new blank toill in. We are stuck in a vicious circle where
we tell ourselves: when this happens, I will be happy.
SO: How distressing!
SS: True! And that's why we are not happy.
SO: We see so many people who are rich; they have helicopters,
private airplanes, their own boats, everything. They still
wander from temple to temple, from one guru to another.
Finally, what are they seeking? How does one put an end
to this search?
SS: First, by understanding that it is separate and second, by
understanding that it is my internal creation and I can create
it irrespective of everything else. I buy a car and then I say
I am happy. The car is a physical object with no feelings or
emotions. Obviously the car is not giving me happiness. So,
what is? I create the thought: 'Wow! I bought a car. I finally
bought what I wanted: These are positive thoughts.
It is the same with say a woman with a new jewellery set.
Is it the jewellery set that is giving her happiness? Or it is she
who is creating the positive thought of possessing that set,
which she thinks is giving her happiness?
SO: But don't you think that the positive thought cannot
be created minus the jewellery set?
SS: Yeah! This means I need an object as a stimulus to create
a response. So it's the object, and the object can be anything,
like the jewellery set. I look at the object and I create a thou
within.
So when we acquire the object, our natural response is
This is a lovely piece of jewellery that I have just got: Now
who created this thought?
SO: That's a tricky question to answer. I create the thought
or was it created because of the object.
SS: A physical piece of jewellery does not have thoughts and
feelings. I look at it and I create a thought 'I have bought
such a lovely piece of jewellery!' If 10 minutes later somebody
walks into the room and says this is not looking nice on you or
says this is fake, then what? Now who is creating the response?
If the stimulus was creating the response then the stimulus will
keep on creating the same response, irrespective of a change
in situation. Further, if I show the same piece of jewellery
to 10 people, will all of them create the same thoughts? For
someone it's too loud I can't wear this, I don't like this at
all; for another it could be I am sorry, I don't like jewellery
at all, it could also be I really want this or how sad that I
can't afford this. The piece of jewellery is the same.
SO: My reaction to the piece is my choice.
SS: It is my thought.
SO: I am reacting, which means I am creating. I am creating
either happiness or unhappiness.
SS: So we could create thoughts of pleasure or thoughts of
jealousy or hurt with the same object of jewellery. The stimulus
is the same, the object is the same. If the object had to crea
te
the thought, it would create the same thought in everyone.
If the object - whether a car, a piece of jewellery, or a lovely
garden - is what is creating the thought, then it should create
the same thought in every person. Look at this greenery. You
may think how lovely it is to be with nature, while another
person may just overlook it while walking and not even realize
its beauty.
These are different responses to the same stimulus. The
response is the choice of the creator and I am the creator.
SO: I am the creator and I am creating unhappiness or
happiness. Many of my thoughts and questions
have been answered by this. But how does one do without
a stimulus?
SS: By understanding that I am creating the thought. We
were not aware that we are the creators. We tend to believe
that thoughts come to us because of something outside. Let's
suppose that you say something which according to me is
a little rude, and I get hurt. I do not even think that I am
creating that feeling of being hurt. I very conveniently say
You hurt me. I think it is all coming from outside. Then I say
that you need to talk nicely to me for me to feel better. You
better apologize because once you do that, I am going to feel
better. This is dependency
SO: Then he would say I never meant that.
SS: But you hurt me. We can just go on and on. I am hurt
because of you I am angry because of you I am upset
because of you I am jealous because of you I am happy
because of you.
SO: If everything is happening because of others around, it
means I am not taking responsibility of mysell.
SS: No responsibility and no control. How helpless are we if
we are always dependent on anything external
SO: Isn't that a weakness?
SS: But isn't that the way we are living our lives? The minute
we understand that this is an illusion, that they are not
controlling us, and we are not dependent on them, we have
a choice of what we create. This is independence. That's why
the first thing that spirituality gives us is freedom. It liberates
us. We are liberated from all the dependencies, everything we
thought we were dependent on and postponed your happiness.
We just postponed it, convincing ourselves that we could not
be happy till we had what we wanted.
SO: It is very difficult to understand how I can be happy
without what I want?
SS: We talked about objects, but what about achievements? 'I wanted to achieve this particular goal but I haven't reached
there, so how can I be happy?' We have been brought up
to believe that only those who achieve what they want
will be happy This is what we were taught when we were
children.
SO: I always thought that it was very natural to be that
way. If I fail to get a job three times in a row, then I feel
depressed, and it's very normal. I used to think like that.
SS: I thought that my happiness was dependent on getting the
job. I thought it was normal and that's why getting upset was
a normal reaction too. Becoming tense is normal, to worry
is normal, to fear is normal, to feel sad is normal, but
feel happy doesn't come so easily to us. Problems will come,
challenges will be there, but to despair or to deal with them
is our choice.
Because everything else is outside.
SO: But that outside is also disturbing me inside.
SS: That's the choice. Does it disturb everyone in the same
manner? Faced with failure, someone could go into depression,
someone else could commit suicide, and yet another one would
say 'Okay, I'm doing it again' and be successful the next time.
This is same failure, but different responses.
That's why my thoughts and feelings are in my hand. Just
this one mechanism will change the way I live my life.
SO: But isn't it too quick? Between the moment when
something happens and when you react, there is hardly any
time to tell oneself that Look, this is a thought and it is
just something outside and not inside. Where is the time
for me to control my reaction?
SS: That's why we are living our lives in an automated mode. You
know it's like how a machine functions. What's the difference
between a machine and a human being?
A machine has no choice - we put it on and off and then
on and off. It is dependent on the person who is using it. You
press the button and it's on, press the button again and it's
off. Human beings, have a choice. Someone comes and says
something to me - they press a button; if I am a machine
will say 'obviously I will get angry. What is obvious about it?
Obvious is only for a machine because it is made to work
automatically.

SO: But everybody is living in that automated mode except
for the saints and a few others.
SS: No, it's not about saints. It's just about being aware that
we are human beings. People are pressing the button but we
have a choice.
SO: Do say something about the meditation you do every
day: Probably because of this practice you have been able
to understand the difference between what is happening
outside and what you are creating inside. How can one
meditate like you? People usually think that meditation is
about sitting in a corner and not thinking. It's so difficult
for us to not think for a moment. Can you make this a
little easy for us?
SS: Let me tell you a very simple thing: meditation is not
about stopping the thinking process, rather it is to be aware
of what I am thinking and to choose what I am going to be
thinking.
SO: To be aware of what I am thinking
SS: Yes, like we are aware of what we are speaking.
SO: I am not aware.
SS: You are not speaking in an automated mode. You choose
what to speak, you choose your actions - when to sit, when
to get up, when to walk, when to sleep. We are choosing our
actions, our words. Of course, sometimes the thoughts come
so fast that we feel even the words are automated, and we say
I didn't mean to say that. So, a step further will be to become
aware of what I am thinking, to choose our thoughts and
thereby choose our responses. It's a simple exercise we begin
every morning and can do it any time during the day - just
watch your thoughts.