SO: Having told myself that I am the person
in charge of my emotions; I cannot play the blame game
anymore. But I think it is very difficult to understand what
you are saying about not reacting to whatever anybody says.
Is this possible?
SS: I do respond, but there is a difference. I am not saying
that we do not respond it's like you are saying something to
me and I am just a stone wall with no thoughts, feelings and
emotions. That's not right. The question is which thoughts,
which feelings, which emotions? It's not that I either react or
don't respond at all; reaction means an automated response.
Sometimes I have to regret my reactions. How many times we
have to say sorry to people?
SO: I end up regretting my words or action so many times.
SS: What do we regret?
SO: Unnecessary retaliations.
SS: So we regret our own reactions. You behave in a certain
manner and I react, and then I have to come back and apologize.
SO: Because I overreacted as compared to how the other
person behaved with me.
SS: It's not about the magnitude of reacting: it's about my
not being comfortable with the way I reacted. Normally what
happens is that we measure, like you said overreacted. This
means we are always measuring our reactions with reference
to the other person's behaviour. If you shout at me, I double
shout; why? We are always doing it with reference to other
people. My personality should be mine, my responses should
be mine, and my way of talking should be mine, irrespective
of the other person. If I keep changing with reference to
everyone I meet, then there will be nothing left in me that
is of my own
SO: Somebody doesn't want to say hello to you, he passes by
You think okay, he didn't say hello to me, so why should I?
SS: Let's say courtesy is your quality; being nice and friendly
comes naturally to you; it's your personality. So there you are
walking along a corridor, and you are about to say a very nice
warm good morning to me. However, I just look through
you and move away. I am cold at this particular moment, due
to whatever reason - it may be my nature, my state of mind
because of something that had happened. Maybe I am not
courteous and because of me you give up your quality as well.
Next, you meet someone else who behaves differently and then
you give up another quality. You meet someone who shouts
at you and you give up your quality of sweetness. We absorb
their negativity and give up our quality.
SO: How does one stick to one's quality?
SS: Just by remembering that this is my personality and this
personality is going to be out there during the whole day,
interacting with people, irrespective of what is coming from
outside. So if we take even one quality, let's say being courteous,
it's a simple thing.
SO: Okay, this is my mantra for today: I will be courteous
no matter how, where, why, when.
SS: How difficult is that? See, that's what I have to ask myself
My nature is my nature irrespective of how, where, when, what.
SO: We can keep a fast even on the day we have to go to a
restaurant or a party. In the same way, you can be strong
enough to be courteous today.
SS: Absolutely. Let's take only one quality today. Let's say being
courteous is your quality, being humble is your quality, talking
sweetly is your quality. Don't let it change.
SO: I have seen the difference in people's behaviour when
they are with different people. In fact, there are people who
are not as sweet when they speak to their wives, compared
to when they speak to another person or an outsider or even
somebody else's wife. Why this kind of a change?
SS: We keep changing our personality so many times during
the day that we are not even aware of what our true nature
is. To our spouse, we say 'bring the glass of water,' and to
someone else I say 'can I have a glass of water, please? Which
one of these two is my original nature? It's just that when
we are with our spouse, we do not have the responsibility of
pleasing them; we take them for granted.
SO: Which one is artificial then?
SS: I have to ask myself.
SO: You mean she will feel nice if I speak in the same way
to her?
SS: More important is that you will feel nice if you speak that
way to her. Our behaviour is not for other people; it is first
for us. Will I speak sweetly to you so that you are happy? No,
I will speak sweetly because it makes me feel nice.
SO: Since childhood I have been watching my sisters, brothers,
relations, everybody doing something or the other only for
the outside world.
SS: That is good. But let's add just one criterion here: taking
care of myself first and doing for others what I feel comfortable
doing. There are a lot of people who are doing things for
others and when they do not get something back in return,
they sit back and say, I did so much and what did I get in
return nothing. So, should I be doing it because I want
something in return?
SO: Suppose you get only criticism in return. How will you feel?
SS: First of all, I need to check how I was feeling while doing
it. Nice. That's about it! Now if I get criticism, I just check
whether the criticism is true.
SO: Yesterday I got an email from my niece, saying, 'uncle,
you do so many good things for us. But you made me feel
very unhappy when you were rude to me. She recounted
two incidents and my first justification was 'it was because
I was tired' Honestly speaking, though, she is right. Yes, I
was rude
SS: Fine, you can apologise now. But that will only happen
because you have started looking at yourself. If we give
justifications for our rudeness, then there is a whole list of
justifications. We like to justify our inadequacies and hide
our weaknesses
SO: Here also I blame my mind. I say my mind plays games
with me, I am not doing anything.
SS: My mind, it's mine. It's my responsibility; I am the creator.
We speak about our mind as if it was something different from
us. We are not ready to take responsibility of our mind, saying
it is not in my control. It's like a parent who has given up on
their child. Someone comes and says 'your child is not behaving
properly,' and you reply sorry, my child is not in my control,
please take care of my child. But because my mind is not in
my control, I try to control your mind. If you say something
to me right now and I am not able to control my mind, then
I try to control you. I say, 'is this the way to speak, because
I am not able to tell my mind 'is this is the way to think. So
I focus on teaching you how to speak, because if you speak
nicely then my mind is comfortable.
Let's try one thing. Let's see - how we want to think and
feel and be in every relationship.
SO: How I want to think, feel and be in every relationship!
SS: Let's not concentrate too much on what they will think
and feel about it. Our attention is always about making other
people happy
SO: That is tiring.
SS: But don't you think we are doing it every day? I want
you to be happy, I want my husband to be happy, I want my
children to be happy, I want my colleagues to be happy, I want
my parents to be happy. So I am doing this, I am speaking like
this. It's a very genuine effort, intention is - I want people to
be happy with me, because when they are happy, then I will
be happy
SO: Its either this or I say forget it, I have no interest in
anyone's happiness. It doesn't concern me if someone is
happy or not.' How do I keep a balance?
SS: In India, when a girl gets married and comes to her
husband's home, sometimes the husband's family expects
her to quit her job and be at home. I have met a lot of
women who quit their jobs and gave up their careers. Why?
Because my husband and his family felt that I should not
be working. To make them happy I gave up my career; it's
been 20 years. But even after 20 years, they are still not
happy. So it's a question mark for the girl. She sacrificed so
much, gave up everything that she had studied; sat at home
for 20 years for them; and the family is still not happy with
her. The woman gets frustrated. As a newly married young
girl, when she came into the family it was projected that the
family would be happy when she quit her job. To make them happy she quit her job, but in the inside she was not happy
about the decision.
SO: They thought that if their daughter-in-law doesn't work,
they will be happy. Maybe they are unhappy because of
some other reason
SS: They are not unhappy because of another reason. She has
done this to make them happy, but she has been unhappy
since the day she gave it all up. She is staying in the same
house for 20 years; she chose not to work, but chose it for
their happiness. Its not a choice that she made for herself. She
has done what they wanted, but she is not happy doing it, so
what's the energy that she has been sending to them for the
last 20 years? I am unhappy, I am unhappy because of you
all' So, how can they be happy?
SO: You mean how can they be happy when she is sending
them constant negative energy?
SS: And this is where the secret lies. I cannot make other
people happy by doing anything for them. If I choose to do
something for them, I have to be sure that I am happy first
while doing it - otherwise, I shouldn't do it.
SO: But aren't there certain things to be done whether you
are happy or not happy, because they are part of our duties?
SS: You will do the act but you will not give the right energy.
Its like I give you a gift, it's my duty to give you the gift, but
when I give it to you, I am upset and uninterested. You won't
be happy, you won't even look at the gift because what you
are going to get is the energy of the giver. So I did this for you but what was the energy that I was creating while I was
doing it? Relationships are not actions; relationships are the
energies that we exchange while doing those actions. So if it's
my duty, I first convince my mind why I am doing it and then
I tell the mind that, I am choosing to do this. I am doing this
because these people matter to me.' Create the right thought
and the right energy first before you do something, otherwise
it is best to leave it.
SO: What is the meaning of duty?
SS: Responsibility. We are living with people, and they have
certain expectations of how they want me to be and what
they want me to do. I consider it my responsibility and my
pure desire to make them happy, so I do what they want me
to do. But if I do it unhappily, it will not get me the desired
results. Moreover, because I am doing it for them, very soon
I will be expecting them to do something for me.
SO: It's very difficult for me to understand this.
SS: That's because our focus is all on the doing. Look at the
priorities through the day; I have to DO this, I have to DO
that. The focus has rarely been I have to BE like this.
SO: Let's say for homework, children say I have to do so
much work. Isn't that correct?
SS: Yes, they have to do it, but care has to be on how they are
feeling while doing it. They need to be calm, peaceful, happy,
and then do it. Lets say I have to run from here to there; I
have to be healthy to do it. If I am not healthy and I try to
run, the journey will be tiresome, painful and a struggle. Now
for everything that I am doing the whole day, my whole life, if
I am emotionally healthy, then whatever I do will be beautiful
SO: So how should we be emotionally healthy?
SS: That's an important aspect. It's important to understand
that this is an aspect of my life which we have taken for
granted, which we thought will happen on its own; which we
thought other people will take care of. We always thought - I
am supposed to make you happy and you are supposed to
make me happy.
SO: So often I have heard people saying 'when I get married
I will be very happy, I am tired of my mother, brothers and
sisters.' As it turns out, they are not happy when they get
married also and it's back to square one. That's why I asked
you this question: how and what to do to be emotionally
balanced and stable and to be happy in almost all conditions?
SS: There are people who are not happy in their marriages and
looking for relationships outside their marriage
SO: Then they break that as well and go to the third one.
SS: Because we thought happiness has to come from the other
person. So we kept searching.
SO: So finally we come to the conclusion that happiness
cannot come from outside at all. We have been working so
hard in the wrong direction. We went to temples, we did
social work, went shopping, watched movies, parties, alcohol
each time we only wanted to be happy. Now we have to work
the other way round.
SS: See, whenever I take the mind to something else, what
happens? I am watching a television show or a movie. What
happens? Whatever was going on in my mind has been put
off for some time. Suppose you have a toothache and you start
watching a movie, very soon you will forget the toothache.
When you switch off the TV, the pain seems to start again.
What happened? Does it mean that the tooth was healed and
now it's again hurt? No, it was always in pain but the mind
was distracted. My tooth is paining and I am aware of the
pain. Who is aware of the pain? The mind is. Then I take my
mind to something else, whether it's a conversation, a shopping
trip, or a television programme. I feel the pain is gone but it
is not - it's just that I am not aware of the pain. Then, when
the TV is switched off, I can feel the pain again. Now this is
the case of a physical pain, same is when there is an emotional
pain. The whole day was tough, I created a lot of stress and
anxiety; then I say let's go for a movie, 'let's go for a holiday.
'let's take a break from here and go away for 15 days.
SO: Is it escapism?
SS: It's just that we are trying to take the mind away from there.
SO: Shall we call it temporary happiness?
SS: Not happiness, it's a temporary deviation of the mind from
the truth. It's not happiness because we are coming back to it
after sometime. See, we can call it happiness if it was healed;
your tooth was not healed, it was just that you were not aware
of the pain.
SO: So why do we go for holidays, picnics, movies and all
that?
SS: It's a change: it's entertainment; it's different from the routine.
Let's just be aware of our thoughts and let's not try and
deviate our mind to something else in the pursuit of happiness.
We are suppressing the conscious mind by getting distracted and
then thinking that this will bring us happiness. The minute the
distraction is removed, my conscious mind is back there and
it is back with probably more pain. So I need to take charge;
this is not the solution, this is just running away from the
problem. But for how long can we run away? How long can
we be on a holiday? Finally, I am going to be back at work.
