SO: We were speaking about thoughts and
awareness. I realise that by the time I am aware of something,
the action has already taken place. Thoughts come and go so
fast that it is slightly difficult to be aware or be in control of
them; yes, one thing has happened that when I am getting
angry, I can stop in the middle of things. I am waiting for
the awareness to happen before the anger triggers.
SS: You know this is a very good start, to be at least aware.
You are able to stop there in the middle, which means if earlier
you were going to stay out of control for 10 minutes, now you
will be able to probably finish in a minute or so.
SO: Something within me reminds me, talks to me, to take
control of myself.
SS: Because we have changed our definition of what is natural.
Earlier we said anger was natural; so we gave ourselves the
liberty to get angry. Anger was needed to get work done. That
was our belief system. Our anger was justified so we did not
find the need to change. Now we are experimenting with a
new belief system. Peace is natural and we want peace; and
now we understand that it is our own sanskar. Now when you
get angry, you understand that you are doing something that
is not your natural self, and you realize and stop
SO: We left at a question in the last chapter. What would
people say -look, he is a weak man, the other person said
so and so to him in public but he kept quiet.
SS: First, lets see what is more important: how I feel or what
people feel. This is a very big question. We need to check
carefully, it will be different for each of us. For some their
own personal well-being is more important and for some,
other peoples opinion matters more.
SO: I will say both, but honestly mine is more important.
SS: Let's visualise a scene, two colleagues in an office. One
of them is screaming and hurling abuses at the other one
The opposite person reacts in the same manner and shouts
even louder. Would we call this strength? Now in the same
situation, the second person remains calm and stable, 
understanding that it is not the right time to explain his
perspective. Not only does he remain composed outwardly
but even empathizes with his colleague and retains his good
wishes for him. If you are a spectator to this scene, would
you call this weakness? Let's not even think whether it is
strength or weakness, let's just see which behaviour is more
sensible and easier. If someone shouts at us, is it easier to
shout back or to remain internally stable and retain my right thoughts and feelings for the opposite person who has just
shouted at me?
SO: The second option is very, very difficult.
SS: So that's where strength comes in.
SO: And you think doing something difficult is strength.
SS: Yes, because it requires strength to do something difficult.
I have to pick up this whole chair, it requires strength. I say
I can't do it; it's my physical weakness. To do something
against the tide, of negative energy, to remain protected first
and then create positive energy against the tide of negative
energy requires a tremendous amount of strength. To shout
back and say he shouted at me first, what kind of strength
does that require?
SO: In school we used to get bullied. If we kept quiet, we
would be called a sissy. You are not a man, people would say.
SS: When we are bullied, we are quiet but internally we are
disturbed. If the boss shouts at me, I can't say anything back
because of his position. But internally I am not stable; it starts
having an impact on me. People will say that I may as well
shout back and finish it off, it's better to get angry rather than
keep my anger inside. Here we are not talking about keeping
our anger inside; we are simply not creating that turbulent
energy; that is strength.
SO: It's so difficult these days to say a word
to your boss. Everyone wants to retain their position. People
hear so much from bosses, but internally they are in pain.
SS: So they are already creating anger. It's a silent anger, its
internal. Anger is anger, whether it is in the form of hurt, in
the form of hatred, or in the form of verbal abuse. It's having
an effect on you. But once I start taking care of my thoughts
and feelings, I will be able to stop outside first and gradually
will stop creating it inside. Then it will not matter whether its
my boss or my child; the rule remains the same.
SO: So, to experience unlimited happiness what should one
do? How does one acquire this kind of mental stability?
SS: First, understand that anger is not strength; it's absolute
weakness because in those moments I have gone out of control,
and going out of control is not strength.
SO: If anger is not strength, what is anger? Is it a void? Is
it frustration or an inferiority complex?
SS: Anger is the whole turbulence that takes place inside; I
justify it and I blame the world for what I am feeling, and I
want to get back at them. The anger could be because of one
person and it might come out on another one. We give vent
to our anger in various ways and towards various people. You
say I can't say anything to the boss; so when I come home I
shout at my wife. My wife can't say anything to me, so she
goes and shouts at the child. So I can't say that I didn't get
angry at all; it's just that I accumulated it inside at the moment
when things were heated. I didn't vent it but then I created
it, and eventually took it out on someone or the other. Let's
understand this mechanism. Probably then, I will be paying
a little more attention to what I am doing in my life. Every
time I create a thought, what's the next thing that happens?
SO: After the thought will be the action.
SS: That's a later stage. What happens just after I create the
thought?
SO: When I create a thought, I am creating certain emotions
within me.
SS: Yes. Immediately after I create a thought, the next
thing that happens is the feeling. Sometimes we are not
aware of our thoughts but we are aware of our feelings. I
am not feeling very nice today; I am not sure which is the
thought that I created but I am aware that I am not feeling
nice today. Or I am feeling very nice today; whatever I am
feeling, it's because of some thoughts that I created. So, if I
am not aware of my thoughts, let me just be aware of how
I am feeling today because the feeling is only a result of the
thought. I have to meet you.. this is a thought that I will
create. Based on my past experiences or what I have heard
about you, it will immediately generate a feeling. Thought is
always followed by a feeling.
All my feelings put together about you, about the world,
help me develop my attitude. A thought about you is followed
by a feeling subsequently; and because this has happened many
times, an attitude towards you is also created. You know, when
we talk about 'changing our attitude', it is about changing the
thought. How can I change my atitude? I have to first change
the thoughts that I created.
We cannot change our attitude. We have to change the
thoughts, and our attitude will automatically change.
SO: And to change the thought?
SS: That's what we have been talking about - sit back, check,
choose and change.
SO: Awareness and practice. And awareness itself is practice.
Being aware, being aware, being aware all the time, that's
the practice.
SS: And gradually you will find that your atitude has changed.
SO: You won't have to think of anything because then it is
automatic.
SS: It is in the process plant.
SO: So the base is the awareness of your thoughts.
SS: There is a stage before that which we will see, but let's
consider the subsequent stages first... thought, feeling, attitude,
and action. If I have a positive attitude towards you, my way
of talking, my way of behaving and what I do with you will
be different, but if I have a negative attitude, everything will
be different.
SO: When you said action, do you know what you remind
me of? My director calling out 'action' and I starting to do
my scene! He says 'cut' and I stop.
SS: This is something we can do throughout the day - action
and then cut. In your profession at least you have a retake,
but in normal life we don't have a retake. The action is already
done. When shooting, despite the retake option you pay so
much attention. In life, where there is no retake, we hardly
pay attention. Every thought that I create has an impact on
me and my body and the people around me. For 10 minutes
I have created thoughts of pain, and in the 11th minute I say
okay, enough now, let me change but those ten minutes. That's
why there is this need for constant awareness. It happens with
practice. The 10 minutes will become 8 and 5 and 3, and then
finally it will be 'okay, this is it'. And then we will reach a stage
where we will not be creating it; we will be aware of it as soon
as we are about to create it and we will say 'okay, change'.
SO: And one day it won't get created at all.
SS: Yes, because then I have come into the consciousness of my
original self that of a pure being. We are now in the transition
stage. It's like we are sleeping and trying to wake up. We wake
up a first and say 'okay, let me sleep for five more minutes
We wake up to the truth and say I am a peaceful being; and
then we create anger once more, that is we fall asleep again.
SO: One has to believe first. If I tell somebody tomorrow
that you are a peaceful being, he will ask me what the proof
is. Is it because everyone yearns for peace?
SS: You only yearn for that which you are. The body is made of
five elements of nature: water, air, ether, fire and earth. Whenever
there is lack of one element in the body, we immediately say
I want water' 'I want fresh air. Why do I want fresh air? Why
do I want water? Because the body is made of this and its
lacking these right now. At that time if you give me anything
else, I will say no. Similarly, I the being am made up of seven
elements: purity, peace, power, love, knowledge truth and bliss.
Every time there is a little imbalance, we say: I want peace, I
want happiness, I want love, I want power.
The method may be different but everyone is looking for
the same things because those are what each one of us is made
of. I can be using anger as a tool but I am never comfortable
when I am angry. Anger is not my nature; anger is an acquired
sanskar, an acquired personality trait.
SO: Probably that is why we like a peaceful person, a peaceful
being. We like to sit with a saint, and feel at peace in a
particular temple or shrine, or under a tree.
SS: Because we have come closer to our natural self. We go
to a scenic place to see the sunrise or the sunset, to feel nice
Stuck in the middle of a traffic jam, we don't feel nice. Why?
Chaos is not our natural self. A place or person or a situation
that makes us feel closer to what we actually are, makes us
feel nice as well.
SO: So all these seven elements are me and this is the proof
that whenever I am at peace I am happy. How does one get
the battery recharged for all these seven elements?
SS: Try to understand the process completely. Now I am
changing my thought from 'I want peace' to 'I am peace'.
Thought changes, feeling will change, attitude will change.
and action will change. Now my actions will not be focussed
on seeking peace, because now I know that I am peace. My
actions will be coming from my discovered nature of peace.
Any action repeated a number of times becomes a habit.
All my habits put together make up my overall personality. So
who I am today, the personality is a package of every thought
we create. Personality development programmes teach us to
talk like this, smile like this, say hello like this and so on,
but they will not work if we are not happy inside. How can
I keep smiling if I am not happy? And even if I am smiling,
what energy am I sending out? So, personality begins in the
mind. So it is thought - feeling - attitude - action - habit -
personality. Now, we come to the last and most important step.
This personality goes out into the world, working, socializing
and being with family; at every step I am creating my destiny.
And it started from my thoughts.
SO: Oh! So thought is creating destiny? And life is a
manifestation of one's thoughts? I am creating my future, I
am creating my life, and I am creating my environment. I
am getting back what I am giving. Today it all starts from
a thought and it envelops our life, our future, our destiny.
SS: And then we would do anything to change our destiny
today. We can go to an astrologer, to a numerologist, to a tarot
card reader. We want them to predict our destiny, and if it's
not what we like, then we ask them to do something to change
our destiny. The truth, though, is no one can do anything.
SO: How can we change our thinking?
SS: First step is to understand how important it is. Earlier we
would say that they did this to me so I have to get back at
them. But now we take care that what we think and do will
create our destiny. We are so confused today about destiny;
we say this happened to me; it's my fate, my luck. But fate
decided by who? Since we don't know who it is, we just point
the blame somewhere up there and say God decided this for
me, again putting the responsibility on someone else because
we are not ready to take the responsibility. The fact is I am
creating my destiny. The energy that I send out is my 'karma'
and the same energy when it comes back in the form of
situations or people is destiny. When we go to an astrologer
and he tells us to wear a particular ring because things will
be much better then, we obey and wear the ring. When we
wear the ring we create a thought naturally that now things
will be better for us, and things are actually fine because we
use the ring as a stimulus to change our thoughts, and thereby
change our destiny.
SO: So it comes to having faith in that ring.
SS: Yes. If I wear the ring without faith, it will not work.
SO: A holy person tells us that he will write this particular
prayer, put it in a taweez and you wear it around your neck,
then no black magic or any evil is going to afflict you. We
are so sure that nothing will happen to us now. So our
thought has changed.
SS: For how long are you able to create that thought after
wearing it? If we are not aware, this thought will be there
for a few days; after that the ring or taweez is just a part of
the body.
SO: I never thought of this point. Now somebody gave me
this ring and I am wearing it; for a few days I am aware. I
think if I wear this, all my negativities will be gone and I
will be a happy person. I forget it after sometime and go
to my actual nature. I haven't changed myself at the core.
SS: You used the ring as a stimulant to change your thought.
Until you are aware of the ring, you are creating the right thought and the belief that 'now everything will be okay, no
one can do anything wrong to me'. This was the thought that
was required, with or without the ring. But because you are
wearing the ring, faith in the ring makes it easier to create
these thoughts. One month down the line it's a part of your
body and again you will go back to your same old thought
process - 'they did this to me, they did that to me'. When
you forget that you are wearing the ring, then the effect will
not be there.
SO: So stimulus is creating the thought
SS: Stimulus is not creating the thought; I am using the stimulus
to create the thought.
SO: I am creating my own thought because of the stimulus.
So you want us to do the same thing without this ring?
SS: You are doing it, the ring is not.