SO: I read an article in a newspaper recently, which said
'Peace feels happiness. What comes first, peace or happiness?
Can you be at peace if you are not happy? The answer to these
questions depends on your idea of happiness, on whether
you get happiness from external factors or from within.'
SS: Yes, but this is not the first time that we are reading about
this. We read and hear about it often, but what happens at
the stage of practical implementation? We read about the
subject every day in the newspaper, in the spiritual column,
in self-help books. Today the largest-selling books are on the
topics of self-help and positive-thinking, self-motivation, self-
development and spirituality. Seminars and workshops, too
are organised often. Yet, what's on the rise is stress, anger and
anxiety and unlimited unhappiness. So that's the question
mark - even though knowledge is everywhere, and there is
realization as well, I am looking for happiness outside. This
means we haven't taken knowledge and internalised it. Instead,
we are accepting stress as natural. So there is a huge difference
between what I know, what I am studying, what I believe, and
what I am implementing
SO: You mean to say we do not believe in what we read
SS: It's not a part of our belief system yet. Stress is natural
it's a belief system and has developed over a period of time,
right from our childhood. As a child, we had our parents
saying, aren't you tensed, you have an exam tomorrow; how
can you be so relaxed?' So it's a belief system that developed
and got entrenched while I was growing up, and reinforced by society which said obviously stress is natural with so much
competition around you. So it's a deep-rooted belief system
and we have lived with it.
Then I read somewhere that 'happiness is your internal
way of living, it's your internal way of being, it's how you
choose. But it doesn't change the belief system; I just read it
and carried on with my life as I had been doing all along.I
say it doesn't work in practical life, and that's where workshops,
spirituality and religion get separated from my practical life. I go to
a retreat, attend a management workshop or a spiritual
programme, and listen to something that is very pure and
powerful. While I am listening to it, I absolutely agree that it
is true. Then when I come back, I am still my old self and say
those things don't work here. It was okay for those people to
say what they did, but they are not in my circumstances. We
don't even try, we don't experiment. We think it will happen
automatically. Well, it won't. Whatever I have studied and
whatever I have understood, I will have to put in a little effort
at applying it. Now I have understood that anger is unnatural
that it is a response I create; so when I come to my workplace
or spend time with my family, I will have to take care that
I do not react the next time someone does something that
according to me is not right.
SO: You remind me of my Guru. I used to ask her about the
way to attain peace, but did not get a direct answer. I was
someone who did not know the meaning of peace. Waiting
for the lift, I used to keep pressing the button till it reached
me. I was a restless man all the time and I said I wanted
peace. Your words remind me of that line she said, 'you
ask me every time about peace, but do you do any karmas
of peace?' I could not relate to what she was saying. When
I went outside I saw that somebody had parked his car in
front of mine. I wanted to kick that car. I opened my car
door and wanted to honk, and I remembered what she had
said inside, about doing karmas of peace.
SS: I want peace but I think it has to come from outside.
Similarly, I want happiness, I want love, and so on. Want
means that someone, somewhere has to do something so that
I will get it. On the other hand, spirituality teaches us that I
am peace. I have to be at peace while I am doing everything.
I am a blissful being; I am a love-full being.
SO: But if I am, then why do I want?
SS: Because I have forgotten that I am. It's like the keys in your
pocket or the spectacles on your head. You may be looking
for them everywhere and even get others to join you in that
search. 'Come on, everyone, look for my keys. Where are my
keys?' You look for it everywhere except where they actually are.
SO: How does one realize or even begin to understand that
I am peace? How do you prove this?
SS: By experimenting. Everything is a belief, we experiment
with it, and if we get the result, we take it as the truth. Keep
searching for peace, for thats the purpose of life'. If the purpose
of life is to keep searching for peace, then when will we find it?
But now we understand this is our nature. Let me experiment
a peaceful being. Now I will use this awareness in every
act that I do, with every person I meet. Every interaction I have
today, I will only remember that I am the one who is doing
it. Think of a doctor. He knows he is a doctor, so if someone
meets with an accident while he is there on the road, he will
immediately get into the healing job. But if the doctor forgets
that he is a doctor, even if there are people dying around him
he won't do anything because he has forgotten he is a doctor. So
healing won't come into action. But the minute he remembers
again that I am a doctor, he will start healing. So it's about
remembrance. I am a peaceful being was forgotten. Because it
was forgotten, I was looking for peace outside. Now try a new
belief system. Try - it's still not the truth, it's only a belief Just
experiment with it. If we get the result, then it is the truth.
SO: How will you experiment?
SS: I go back to work today and find that there is a situation.
I just remind myself that I am a peaceful being and then act.
SO: I just keep on at this like a mantra.' I am a peaceful being.
I am a peaceful being. A peon comes and says something
that disturbs me and I shout shut up: Again, I am angry
Then I start the mantra again, I am peaceful being
SS: It's not a mantra, it's a conviction. I am telling myself who
I am and then preparing myself. Everything that I do will
be out of this consciousness. This is who I am. It's a simple
thing. Let us say there is a space here in the mind. I think it
is empty and say I want happiness, I want peace and I want
love. I go to everyone expecting that they will fill my space.
Please do this so that I will be happy. Please talk to me nicely
so that I will be peaceful. This is one way of living life; this is
one belief system. The other belief system is that my space is
full but now I have to go through the whole day taking care
that its contents don't spill out. That's all - it's full but I have
to take care of it. This is the journey; this is what Awakening
is all about. It is about understanding
that this is who I am, that now I am peaceful. I just have to
remember that while I am talking to you its contents should
not spill out.
SO: I am peaceful. The moment I am not peaceful, it spills
out?
SS: One way is: I do this so that I will be happy. The other
way is: I am happy and now I will do this.
SO: I am happy and I will try to make you happy too.
SS: I don't know whether I will be able to make other peopie
happy because that is another deep-rooted belief system.
SO: What I mean is, when you are around a happy person,
you also feel happy because the atmosphere is happy.
SS: True, but someone can be around a happy person and
still be very sad unless they take charge of their thoughts and
feelings. This is again a deep-rooted belief system that we can
make others happy; no one can make the other happy unless
they want to be happy themselves
SO: Then no one can make you sad too.
SS: Absolutely, and that is what it means when I say that I
am not dependent on other people for my emotions and my
feelings. The most established belief system is - 'Happiness' is
dependent on other people.
SO: What does love do to people? She makes me happy, he
makes me happy.
SS: When I am with this person, I have nice thoughts and
that's why I tell myself I am happy when I am with this
person. Then I tell myself that this person makes me happy.
This is how we also depend on objects - whether a car or
a piece of jewellery - to create similar kinds of thoughts
We use these as stimulus to create a particular kind of thought.
Between the stimulus and the response is my freedom to
choose my response. I have the freedom to decide how I am
going to respond. Today you talk to me nicely and I am very
happy; tomorow you do something that according to me is
not right, and I am hurt. But you are still the same.
SO: I am not still the same; I was different yesterday. I
was speaking to you nicely. I am the same person but my
behaviour is changed, so you will be shocked by this changed
behaviour
SS: So my response is dependent on your behaviour. Are you
always going to behave the way I want you to?
SO: No, I am going to be in different moods on different
days, at different times.
SS: Are you wrong?
SO: It is normal.
SS: Are you wrong?
SO: I am right.
SS: According to?
SO: Myself.
SS: But according to me, you are wrong. So I have conditioned
myself to believe that this is right and this is wrong. I want
people to be right so that I will be happy.
SO: You mean to say you are going to try to control my
behaviour, so that you see me as always being nice to you
I should behave as you want me to?
SS: Because then I will be happy.
SO: So are you controlling me?
SS: Yes, I am controlling you, and that's what we are doing
everyday with people. We are doing that with our little
children, with everyone around us. We want them to be or
do or perform or behave in a particular manner because that
will make us happy.
Which I think is right, which I think is the way to be. I
feel what I think is right and what the other person is doing
is wrong, and then my happiness becomes dependent on that.
SO: Then what is a relationship for? Don't you depend on a
friend? If I have some problem, I may want you to help me.
SS: That's fine. But my state of mind experiences pain or
happiness being dependent on the other person's behaviour.
Let's say I expected you to call me up last evening - if you
don't call me, I am hurt. Why? Since my happiness is dependent
on your behaviour
SO: Honestly, I still feel that is natural. If my wife speaks
to everybody and not to me, then I will feel hurt.
SS: You still have a choice.
SO: This is what I want to learn.
SS: You have a choice. Okay, she did not call me up, though
I thought she should have. I could still be stable by creating
different thoughts. I could create the thought that she
was busy, or that she did not feel like talking to me at
that time.
SO: I think I have got the answer. One of my friends was
telling me this incident. He had just reached his house and
saw that it was locked. He had come from an enlightening
seminar where there were discussions about various aspects
of life. When he saw the locked house, in his usual mood he
would have just broken the lock in anger. Instead, he went
to his daughter's house, which was just next door, picked up
the spare key and opened the door. Just as he went inside,
his wife returned. He wanted to confront her first about the
locked house, but instead asked her where she had been. She
said she had been to the market and had tried to contact
him, but his phone was switched off. He realised that he
had switched off the phone while the seminar was going on
This meant that she was right and so was he.
SS: Absolutely. Everyone is always right. It's not important
whether they are right or they are wrong. First of all I have
to be right - not do right but BE right. This means I first take
care of myself and this will only happen when I gradually bring
myself out of this mental conditioning that my state of mind
is dependent on other people. How many people have we held
responsible for our pain? Every time we hold other people
responsible, we are telling ourselves it's their fault, and I am
fine the way I am. But I have to understand that people are
doing what they are doing; they could be cheating on me but
the pain is my creation. Let's say you are my business partner
and you have cheated on me, but the hurt, the resentmernt
and the hatred that I feel are my creation. You cheated me
financially and ethically, and that's where your power ends
That's where the power of anybody outside ends, whether its
a business partner, a spouse, or a child.
Our thoughts, feelings and responses are OUR choice
SO: But something keeps troubling me inside.... Why can't
I get back at him for what he has done?
SS: Let's say your business partner cheated on you and you
parted ways. But now you want to do the same business that
he is doing, with the thought, 'I want to come into the market
as his competitor and I want to take my revenge. I believe
I am right.' So you parted ways since your partner did not
conduct himself in an ethical manner. But you want to now
start a business with the feeling of taking revenge is this the
kind of energy that you want to bring into your new work?
Is this your thought process while starting the new venture?
This you have to ask yourself. How you are going to think and
feel is your choice. You are hurt and for how long you will
remain hurt is also your choice. You want to live with your
pain for 10 minutes, 10 days, or 10 years, is your choice. You
can sit back, think of the situation, and relive the pain again
and again, even years after it happened. Who is the creator of
these emotions? It's you. In the same situation, different people
will create different responses. So this has to be experimented
with at every step
SO: So if my wife didn't call me when I expected her to,
maybe she was busy or my phone was off, but the mind
goes on thinking about it. What is that?
SS: Whose mind is it?
SO: My mind.
SS: Who is creating the thoughts?
SO: The mind, not me.
SS: Whose mind is it?
SO: My mind.
SS: So who is creating the thoughts?
SO: I will say my mind is creating the thoughts.
SS: But it's my mind, so who is creating the thoughts? I am.
Look at yourself creating those thoughts. She should have
called me; I was waiting for her call. So you sit back and just
change your thoughts gradually. She didn't feel like talking to
me at that time. It was her choice.
SO: She should be happy when she speaks to me, that's what
my mind says.
SS: Yes, because I like people to be dependent on me. I am
dependent too. It's this control that gives me power. I am empty
inside and I love this idea of people being dependent on me.
I think I am more powerful because people are dependent on
me for feeling good. Because I am dependent on other people,
I feel other people should also be dependent on me for feeling
happy; how could she be happy without talking to me because
I am not happy without talking to her? We are trapped, and
we are trapping other people into being dependent on us. And
all this is happening in the name of love and respect and trust,
which is supposed to be unconditional