SO: I was reading, 'What comes first: peace
or happiness? Can you be at peace if you are not happy? Do
you get happiness from external factors or from within? The
mind is fickle like a fast galloping horse and the only way
to control it is by involving it in good actions beneficial for
all' I need your help to understand this.
SS: "The quotation says - "When you are at peace, you will be
happy depending on what your idea of happiness is, whether
you get it from outside or from inside.' Let us stop and check
what outer happiness is. It's not outer happiness - it's an outer
stimulus which I use to create happiness for myself.
SO: I like the way you say, 'I create happiness'; emphasis
always on our creation, you never say, 'it gives me happiness'
SS: At every step, when you are happy, when you are hurt
when you are upset, just stop and ask who is creating it.
I am creating it, irrespective of whatever the situation or the stimulus. The more we are aware we will understand that we
have lived all our life saying you are responsible, whereas all the
time it was we who were creating it. So that is the awakening
Now we only need to take care of how can I change what I 
am creating?
Without this understanding, we would feel powerless because
we believe people are responsible for our happiness and people
are responsible for hurting us. We would wait for people to
talk nicely to us. At the same time, hope that they will always
be nice to us. What if tomorrow they don't talk nicely to us?
Then we will not be happy. There is dependency, and hence
fear.
When we understand that everything is happening here 
in the mind, then there is no insecurity and there is no fear of
the future. So situations could be pleasant or not so pleasant,
and people could be pleasant or not so pleasant, I only have to
take care of one person and that person is me. It's very simple.
The other thing that you mentioned was about the mind
being fickle and the only way to control it is by engaging in 
good acts that are beneficial for all. Fickle means when the
mind is indecisive and inconsistent. When the mind keeps
changing, the quality of thoughts is not very nice; when we
are peaceful, the mind works slowly and cautiously. When we
are worried, the thoughts are very fast; when we are stable, the
speed is slow; when we are fearful, the thoughts gain speed.
So if my mind is fast and inconsistent, it means the quality of
energy is not right. And now we want this mind to do an act that 
is for the good of others. Benevolence is not in the act, it
is first in the energy that I send out while doing the act. Here
again, by asking you to do a benevolent act that will control the 
mind, which is running haywire, we are putting the stress on
'doing something outside which will help you to be peaceful'.
SO: But either way it works, doesn't it? Suppose I am in a
bad mood and I start dancing; it changes my mood. Your
mind is at least not as agitated as before, so you can take a
better decision. What I mean to say is even the outside - in
approach works to a certain extent?
SS: Outside - in works to an extent and for some time. Like
people say when angry count to ten. When we are angry, we
don't even realize before we react. If we had that awareness
that now I am angry, I need to stop and drink water and count
numbers, we would be aware enough not to react.
SO: So we come back to just being aware.
SS: Yes. These are only little-little things given to us so that we
can pause, take a break, and work on our mind. Like you said,
if I dance for some time at least my mind will be in a better
position to understand. So you have just given your mind a
little gap; I am upset with something but instead of confronting
you right now, I take a little gap. Now what is that little gap
for? So that I don't confront you right now. I postpone my
external reaction. The internal reaction is there; I resolve
issue internally and then I decide how to respond. There is a
difference between the reaction and the response. Reaction:
automated and not in my control; response: think, understand
and then respond. That's why we try and bring in those time
gaps, but sometimes, in fact quite often, the reaction is so fast 
that the time gap is lost.
SO: I remember when I was in business there were so many
letters I used to write in anger in the night, after I had
closed down my office. I used to keep the letters for the
next morning to post, but I never used to do it.
SS: The mind is moving at a very fast speed, so postpone
your reaction till the speed slows down. See the situation in a
different perspective and then you may respond in a different
way. This is what we were trying to do right now. And what we
are trying to do now is keep the mind at a slow speed always.
SO: Again you go back to awareness.
SS: Yes. If you are aware, the speed is slow. Imagine that you
have a child playing in the room. If you are not looking at
the child; the child will do whatever he wants. He is dropping
things and breaking things. Now just stand in the corner and
watch the child. Don't say or do anything, just watch the child.
He will become aware and will control his activities.
SO: I try to watch this child (or mind) inside so much but
he finds some place and escapes.
SS: That's the journey, and it's not going to happen in one day.
Have you been able to do it sometimes?
SO: Yes.
SS: That's the proof that we can do it.
SO: Somewhere my mind doesn't like this kind of an exercise.
SS: A child never likes to be disciplined because he is used to
running around wherever he wants, doing whatever he wants.
Suddenly I say I am going to take charge of you now; now
you are going to do only what I want you to do. But then
gradually the mind will get used to this way of thinking because
it's going to be at ease. Even the mind is tired now; its been
running at a very fast speed
SO: Can we switch it off like we switch off the engine of a car
SS: We are not able to switch it off even when we are fast
asleep at night; forget switching off in the day time. We need
to understand why the mind works like this. There are certain
influences on the mind. We know about positive thinking.
yet negative and waste thinking comes naturally. What are
the factors that influence the quality of thoughts? In any
situation, at any time, whatever thought I create is influenced
by three factors. One factor is past experiences. If I had an
interaction with you before, if I had done business with you
before, I have a past experience. Every time I think of you, my
quality of thoughts will be based on those past experiences.
If it had been a pleasant experience then nice thoughts come
to me. Second factor is information - everything that I take
in through my sense organs. What I read, what I watch,
what I eat, everything that is going in has an effect on the
mind; information plays a vital role on the mind. Now, the first
thing in the morning the mind is very clean; it had a good
rest of six hours; it is fresh and ready to create, and ready to
absorb. In the morning we usually read the newspaper first
or switch on the news channels. We are reading, listening and
watching about terror, violence, natural calamities, financial
issues, social and political upheaval, etc. The mind which is like
a clean blotting paper absorbs this troubling information. The
kind of information will influence the thoughts. Information
is the food, thoughts are the resultant energy. If I have eaten
the right food, I am going to be healthy; if I have not been
eating the right food for the mind, my emotional immunity
system is going to suffer.
SO: So that means whatever we are taking in, through media,
through the surroundings, the quality of our thoughts is
dependent on them.
SS: Negative information will give rise to negative thoughts;
that's definite because that's the raw food that I have taken in.
The thoughts are creating the destiny that's the mechanism
inside, but what's creating the thoughts is the raw food, which
is information. So, if I want to take charge of my thoughts,
if I want to change the quality of my thoughts, I will have
to first change the quality of the raw material that goes in.
During the first two hours of the morning the absorption
power of the mind is very high. If we are reading, watching
and listening to only negative things during this time, and
then we want positive thinking, from where and how is it
going to happen? Then, tonight if our child hasn't come back
home on time and his phone is out of range or switched off,
it's so natural to think that something must have happened
to him or her. We need to assess why we feel that something
could have happened to him or her. Why are we creating a
thought that is negative:?
SO: What kind of energy are you sending into the universe!
SS: Yes, we have to wait for half-an-hour and we still can't
get in touch with the child. What is going to be the quality of
thoughts as we wait or in any other situation like that? Then
we will say - 'Is it not natural to think negative. How can we
just sit back and say everything will be okay?
SO: Can't we think of another way that he must have met
a friend and made other plans or he must have gone to a
movie and the network is low there?
SS: How often are we able to think that someone is late because
something nice must have happened? That's a question mark.
Negative thinking comes easily because that's the information
we have inside us. Even if we start with this simple practice
of not watching the news or reading newspapers early in the
morning, it can bring about a big change. Protect yourself, do
not feed yourself with so much toxic food in the morning. Just
this simple practice will bring results.
SO: Then you cannot blame situations because you yourself
will be responsible.
SS: Situation is a trigger; the information is filled inside. When
this trigger comes, the quality of the thoughts created will be
influenced by the quality of the information.
SO: First we take in wrong information or negative
information, then we start thinking negatively. And when
the child comes home, we pounce on him. Why are you late?
What happened? I was so worried.
SS: Why do you pounce? You pounce because in that one
hour that you waited you were creating negative thoughts. This
stimulant has just come and we think he is responsible for all
that we created, so there it goes. How much toxic energy have
we created in that one hour of wait? We sent vibrations to the
other person and spread it to everyone around us in that one
hour, and then we say isn't it natural. No, this is not natural
Natural is he has not reached; I am not being able to contact
him, and the situation is not in my control. Let us always see
immediately what is in my control and what is not. If the
situation is in my control, take charge; but if the situation is
out of my control then there is only one thing in my control,
it is the quality of my thinking.
SO: But tell me one thing: why is it easier to create a negative
thought rather than a positive one?
SS: You just have to fill in a different quality of information. It's
as simple as that. When I change the quality of the information
coming in, the thoughts change, the way I respond changes,
and my destiny changes. I have a choice. When the newspaper
comes in the morning, I have a choice as to what time I will
read it. So let's just postpone it; let's take this one resolve today.
There will be a big change. Postpone the newspaper and the
television news to the later part of the day and substitute it with 
something very pure and powerful. A simple change to
your morning diet for the mind will make all the difference
So one positive thing in the morning, and one positive thing
just before going to sleep is the remedy. What do we take in
before going to sleep? Television serials? A horror movie?
That's the last layer of information going with us. It will affect
the quality of our thoughts during the night. The first layer
of information in the morning influences our thoughts during
the day. The last information before we go to sleep influences the quality of our thoughts at night.
Let's devote 10 minutes to reading something pure and
powerful after we have finished our duties for the day.We have
to fill in the information first because if we just sit and try to
create positive thoughts we won't be able to do it.
We have to change the last layer of information. Once we
finish reading, we will sit back and reflect on that, unpack what
has happened for the day. That's very important; let's not sleep
with unresolved issues. Go through the day. Situations had
come up and there were times when we did not respond in
the right way. Reflecting on the day does not mean reflecting
on all that happened. Instead reflect on the way we responded
and see how we could have responded in a different manner.