SO: I read somewhere that peace and happiness almost
go hand-in-hand. The writer says there is peace in the
smile of a child, in the tender touch of one's mother;
it has got nothing to do with God or religion but
everything to do with the state of one's mind.
SS: Absolutely. In both the instances, the author is talking
about the vibrations of the being. The smile of the child
emanates vibrations of purity and innocence, and the touch
of the mother has vibrations of love and unconditional
acceptance. When we experience these gestures, more than
the act, it is the vibration in the energy that we experience
and that's why there is peace. And wherever there is peace,
there will be happiness
SO: So the mother and the child are so natural. For elders
you have to make an effort.
SS: That's what it's all about; about making it natural. The effort
happens when you are trying to do it for the other person
while the natural is when you are just being yourself. If I am
trying to do things according to what I think will make you
happy, then it is an effort; but if I am just being myself, then
it's natural
SO: You mean to say being myself or being natural is
peace, love and happiness.
SS: Yes. I just have to be in that awareness that these are my
natural qualities. These are not qualities that I will acquire
when I do something; it's my natural personality, my natural
sanskar. It's my original state of being: I just have to remember
it and let it flow not look for it outside
SO: All my life I have been hearing people say 'look, I am
a December-born,' 'I am a January-born,' 'I am a Leo,' 'I
am a Taurus,' I am a so-and-so.' I am a short-tempered
person, my husband is so-and-so, my wife is sweet. It's so
easy to attribute things to one's birth and say 'I am like
this. Now we have got to learn that all of this is wrong.
SS: There's a very beautiful word in Hindi - sanskars. It's the
personality trait. Every being carries five types of sanskars and
that's why it's important to understand the being, because
it is a package made up of these five types of sanskars. The
first set of sanskars we get from the family. We are within
the vibration of the family members, so that energy is
automatically influencing us. The second set of sanskars
comes from my environment, my country, my religion, caste,
city, school and friends. We have always heard - you will be
coloured by the company you keep. The environment and
the people around you, the energy around you, the belief
systems around you, these create sanskars.
The third type of sanskar is sanskars of the past. When l
understand that I am a spiritual being and so I don't die - I
just change costumes and my journey is through each and every costume. Then there are certain sets of sanskars which I
have created in my past costumes. Today I am in this costume,
I am doing a lot of actions, its creating an impression, it's
creating a sanskar. It's time to leave this body but the sanskars
don't get erased, it's like a recording of songs on the CD which
was created and you take that CD and put it on another
every costume player, you are still carrying those songs.
SO: Let's forget about past life since we don't know how
many of us believe in it.
SS: It's not about believing in it; it's because we don't understand
it that we have a lot of conflicts today. You know, the biggest
conflict today in a family is that parents expect all their children
to be the same, Oh, I have given the same upbringing to both
my children, then why are they so different. The parents are
same, the family is same, the environment is same, so they
naturally expect the sanskars of all the children to be the same
Yet, two children can be twins, born under the same zodiac
sign, on the same date and at the same place, and they may
go to the same school, grow up in the same environment,
their personalities will be different. Because few years
back when they were in two different costumes, they were
not in the same family, they were not in the same country,
they were not in the same environment. They have had
different past, and they are carrying their pasts. We cannot
ignore the fact of the past life's sanskars because they are a
dominant factor in determining the present. We are not
able to understand people because we are only seeing them
in their present costume; we are unable to see that they are
carrying a past.
SO: It's a nice way for parents to understand their child.
SS: We keep saying, 'look at your brother, you should be
like him.' We don't understand that they are two different
personalities like the two CDs with two different recordings,
which have come to our house and we are trying to make
one similar to the other.
SO: I have heard mothers telling their children, 'look at
the other boy and look at you; I often doubt that you are
my child; you may have been replaced in the hospital
How hurting these words must be.
SS: She fails to understand from where her child has got
the sanskars that she hasn't given to the child. It's tough for
the child too, because even he doesn't know why he has
these sanskars. For example, a child could have a sanskar of
stealing. He comes from a wealthy family and has everything
at home, yet when he goes to school he will pick up another
child's pencil. It's something that comes instinctively to
him; he doesn't do it logically. That's because the being,
the spiritual energy, the soul has carried some sanskars. When
we are unaware, the sanskars will come into play automatically.
SO: It's difficult to reach this level of
awareness. Often there is such a small gap between a
thing happening and my reaction. In that split second
will I remember that I should not react like this? I
used to see, many Guru, there would be a huge explosion during
Diwali and his eye would not even blink. How do
we reach that stage?
SS: It comes with attention and practice. Earlier if I was
conducting a workshop and somebody's mobile phone rang,
I would get disturbed. There I was talking to the gathering
about stability, but inside I was disturbed.
SO: So it was one step leading to another? Earlier you were
disturbed, another time you must have said, 'it's okay,
they are like that' Next time, you are not even bothered
if they are 'like that' or not; it really doesn't matter to
you. It doesn't distract you anymore. Aren't these the
stages then? One has to go through stages; one cannot
go straight to your stage.
SS: Some people will say 'it's going to take years and years.
No, it doesn't take years, it's just one thought of awareness
otherwise I can get irritated by a mobile phone for a lifetime.
We can live our lives getting irritated by the mobiles that are
ringing around us.
SO: What is the meaning of one thought of awareness?
SS: One thought is 'How can I allow one unimportant
ringtone to disturb my mind?' This is just one thought.
I don't think about the opposite person because it is not the
ringtone that disturbs us; it's the thoughts that I create
alter listening to the ringtone. Why did they not switch off their
mobiles? Don't they know that they are in a public programme?
It's courtesy that you switch off your mobile. So it's not the
ringtone that irritates me; it's the thoughts that I create
in response to the ringtone that irritate me. The ringtone
is just a trigger. I have to realize what is disturbing me. It is
my own thoughts. My thought is that they should be polite
enough to switch off the phone. Now I change my thought
it's their choice, whether they want to switch it off or
and I respect their choice.
SO: I used to get disturbed even if somebody walked in
front of me while I was acting my scene. Now I can see
so many people moving around, and now I am learning
to accept it
SS: Now this is where we are creating the fourth type of
sanskar. Getting irritated was one of the past sanskars,
whether it came from the past birth, or from the current
environment. With awareness we can change our sanskar.
This is creating sanskars with our own will power. So we
cannot keep blaming - oh, I can't help it, this must be a past
sanskar. It's all about awareness.
SO: You are saying that awareness will bring will power.
SS: Yes. It's will power that I will use to create a new sanskar
See, every time I say 'this is because of you'; I am getting
irritated because of this'; I imply that I am not powerful and
others can overpower me. Will power means I have the power
to choose, to think and be and do what I want. Every time I
use that power, it's will power. Many times we feel we don't
have will power. Everyone has power, everyone has the same
amount of will power; it just depends on how much we are
going to use it. It depends on how we are going to sit back
and stop blaming others. We disempower ourselves by not
using our will power.
SO: I met someone who took two days to quit his habit
of drinking of 30 years. You mean to say I have the same
amount of will power as him? If yes, then what is it that
I am unable to see that I have will power or what is it
that's stopping me from using it?
SS: It's simple: I am not using it. A human quality is useful
only if it is being used.
SO: But what if I don't know whether I have a quality
or not? I don't know how to see or use the quality.
SS: That's why we are learning. It's that area of life on which
we now start focusing attention. If we say we don't have time
for spirituality; we don't have time to meditate; then we are
choosing not to use the powers that we have. We are choosing
not to apply the tools that are there.
It's like I have a whole lot of property in my locker but
I am refuse to open it and use it for myself and helping
others; rather, I go around begging people for love, peace and
happiness because I don't want to use the time to go into my
own locker, open it and use it from there.
SO: So your locker is meditation?
SS: It's here in the mind and the key is with us, and only we
know how to open it.
SO: So there is no need to go to anyone for getting my
locker opened, for developing my powers.
SS: If we go somewhere, somebody out there could be
instrumental in telling us how to open it, but finally no one
else can open it for us. No one can activate the will power
for us; that someone can only help us realize that we have
this power. A simple example is when we want to give up
our addictions. Someone may want to give up alcohol,
cut down their TV watching time, or Internet surfing. We
create a powerful positive thought,
Today I will watch TV only for an hour.' We are aware
of this positive thought we create, but we are not aware of so
many negative thoughts we create immediately, It is difficult
for me .. I love watching TV.. I have tried many times
but I always fail. 
It's my habit. Can't go in one day .. Obviously
it will take time. Now we created one positive thought to
empower ourselves, and then followed by so many negative
thoughts which will disempower us. Once you have decided
to do something, just create one single thought and start
working on it.
SO: If we all have the same will power, then how is it
that some are able to give up their addictions sooner
than others.
SS: Everyone has equal will power because everyone is a powerful
being; realizing my own will power depends on how much
am aware that I am a powerful being and how much I use it
Of course, the people around me also make a difference
You know, we are largely responsible for reducing the will
power of those around us, especially our children. Let's say
your child spends too much time on the Internet and you
tell him that from tomorrow he is going to be on it only for
an hour. Your words are affirmative, but your thoughts are
of doubt and failure in giving up the addiction.
SO: Internally I am so sure that my child will not be
able to do it.
SS: Every thought that I create is the energy that I am
showing or radiating to the child
SO: But why should the child get disturbed by the energy
of the parent?
SS: We get influenced by the thoughts, words and actions
of other people. We have to be very strong and protected
and that can happen if we practice not getting influenced
by the energy around us. Right now we are quite vulnerable.
So everything thats happening around us creates an impact.
We should take care of ourselves and the people around us,
if someone is trying to do something, do not create a single
thought of doubt or negativity. If we create thoughts of
doubt and fear for the child, we disempower the child. Let
us create only powerful thoughts, you can do it, we have
faith in you.' Even if the child does not have the power, he
will get empowered by the parents and succeed. Today in
the corporate sector they are saying we motivate our people.
Motivation will not happen with words. Your subordinate is
late every day; you motivate him by saying I am sure you
will do it. But your thinking is 'I know him, he is not going
to come on time; he will always be like this.
Thoughts and words are different. So when we say we are
family and we are friends and we are there for each other, let
it not be just in words. There should be harmony between
thoughts and words, and that's the simplest thing to take
care of in relationships. Let there be no conflict between
what we are thinking and what we are saying. When there
is a difference, there is also a conflict in the energy that the
opposite person receives. Remember, that the thought energy
travels faster.
SO: Don't you think today's world is like this? We say
'wow, you are wearing such a nice shirt' Inside we are
thinking 'he doesn't have taste'
SS: Why did we say 'wow, you are wearing a nice shirt?
SO: A lot of people talk like that. We pick it up from
everyone around us.
SS: But why do I say to you that your shirt is very nice?
SO: To please people.
SS: To please people. This is extremely important. We are
saying it to make people happy. Now, happiness is not words
happiness is energy, it is vibrations, it is feelings. I am sending
a word out by paying a compliment to your shirt, and I am
also sending other thoughts saying horrible shirt, horrible
choice, no taste at all. So what's the total energy that comes
to you? In fact vibration reaches faster and is much more
powerful than the words.
SO: He will know that I did not like his shirt.
SS: He won't be able to catch your thoughts. We can't catch
people's thoughts. The mind needs to be really very silent
to be able to catch peoples thoughts, but we can catch the
feelings, the vibrations. That is why sometimes after meeting
people and having a polite conversation, we still feel, I don't
think they really meant what they said, they were nice to talk
to but I don't feel anything nice after they left.' The foundation
of this relationship is false, so it's no relationship at all. If
I send this conflicting energy to you, you will doubt
intentions and then you will always doubt my intention.
Then there is no trust in this relationship; one word and the
relationship is over because there was no foundation. So we
need to ask ourselves what are we doing
One option is: I don't say that you are wearing a nice shirt
if I am not convinced that it is nice. If I don't feel it's nice, I
shouldn't say it's nice; it's integrity. If at all I still want to say
it's nice, first let 'me understand that its nice, by creating
a thought: okay I might not like a white shirt but that's just
my choices your choice is nice for you. Create this thought
and then say it. I keep working on myself till my thought
and words are in harmony and then I communicate. That
is communication
SO: If I say you are wearing something nice and actually
I do not mean it, what happens to me? What am I doing
to myself, to my soul, to my personality?
SS: I am cheating myself. I am not honest to myself, what I
think, I don't do. There is disharmony between my thoughts,
words and actions; I think something else, I say something
else; and I do something else. There is disharmony and this
disharmony will then continue. Again I will think I have to
do this, but my words and actions will not follow, which will
reduce my will power. It's going to be damaging for us and
that is why our will power is low today.
SO: We understood the four types of sanskars, which
is the fifth type?
SS: The fifth sanskar are the original sanskars. When I
understand my original sanskar, it is easy to take care of
the other four. Past birth sanskars not in my control
sanskars from family - not in my control; sanskars from the
environment not in my control; will power - in my control
I can create new sanskars through my will power but even
will power gets activated when I understand my original
sanskar, my original nature, and that's the original nature of
every human soul on this planet. Every being is originally
pure, affectionate, peaceful, blissful and powerful. Every being
has this nature and we are looking for it outside because we
have forgotten that this is my nature. Spirituality shifts our
belief from I want happiness and peace to the truth that I am
a peaceful being; I am a blissful being; I am a powerful being.
And then it becomes natural and the whole perspective
will change. If I want peace, then I am always seeking outside.
If I understand, I am peace, then I become a giver. So it ends
our looking for happiness, asking for love, and we start sharing
our peace, love and happiness with all. It automatically flows
from us to the people around us. Like when we are stressed
we don't have to consciously give it to others, all who come in
our energy field automatically receive it and are influenced. Similarly by being in our natural state of peace and
happiness, we don't have to give it, it will naturally radiate and
be felt by family and friends. Energy is like an infection
we catch it from the people around us.