SO: What about our past experiences
influencing our mind.
SS: We cannot avoid our past experiences. They are already
recorded in the memory, but we can try not to play the
same record again and again. Because every time we play it,
we are converting the past into the present. We are creating
the same emotions all over again, and every time we create
the same emotion, we deepen the sanskar. We deepen the
wound, by scratching it. It's a past wound, we need to heal
it, but suppose we open the Band-Aid from time to time
and scratch it, how will the wound get healed. Sometimes
we also get others to join us. So the wound never heals. The
past has passed. Full stop. No comma, no question mark, no
exclamation mark. Why, what, how Full stop. So that we
are able to move ahead, fresh and clean, and now what we
create, will get recorded. People say we remember the past
because we have to learn from the past, but what do we have
to learn from the past? We just have to check the way we
responded and learn if there was a more comfortable way of
responding. There is nothing to learn from the situation, we
only have to learn from our response. Holding on to things,
not letting them go, accumulating, it is only going to cause
pain. It's like you are holding on to something; the weight
of the object remains the same but the longer we hold it, the
more the hand is going to hurt.
SO: Hurt! People get constant headaches, skin diseases,
and no doctor knows what's happening.
SS: Because they are holding on to it. Remember, it's over.
It's the past, not in my control.
SO: What should one do? Suppose something very sad
has happened in my past and it comes to my mind. A
friend comes and asks what the matter is, and I share
with him about what took place in the past.
SS: That's what is meant by opening everyone's Band-Aid
together and scrubbing on the wounds. We went through so
much of pain but when we think about it again, we experience
the same pain all over again. So we need to ask our self: how
many times am I going to go through the same emotions
again and again? More importantly anything done repeatedly
becomes my personality, and then I carry that personality
with me everywhere. We may not discuss the past situation
with everyone, but because it's in our mind it will be part of
our vibrations.
SO: But don't you also attract such people and such
situations?
SS: We are not attracting situations, but we are responding
to situations in a similar manner as before. If there is a
challenge, since we are already emotionally low, we don't
have the power to face the situation in a proactive way. I
am already hurt about something that happened years
back, and here comes another fresh stimulus. I don't have
the strength. The pain that I will create will be much more
than what I would have created had I healed my past. Also
pain created because of one particular situation or person,
does not remain only in that relationship with that person
The pain has now become a part of my personality, and I
will tend to get hurt more easily in other relationships too.
SO: So it is link after link after link.
SS: Because it's my personality, not theirs. I can use you as
the stimulus and say I am hurt, but now its my personality
This personality will go with me to every situation and every
person. So I am vulnerable every time. It's not about changing
your job, its not about changing your partner, your friends,
your spouse; it's about making yourself stronger.
And then your immunity system, your emotional
immunity system, is strong wherever you are, with whoever
you are. It doesn't matter who and how they are.
SO: Do you think it's easy for people to change their
thoughts?
SS: People are doing miracles with their lives. They are doing it; no one else is doing it. The first realisation is - IT'S ME, NOT
THEM. We are responsible for how we feel, no one to blame.
I have seen couples who were on the verge of divorce coming
back to a happy married life with only one understanding
it's not him or her, it's me I have to work on. Things change.
SO: In a divorce, it's a blame game.
SS: In a divorce it is usually about 'you are wrong'. Now we
understand, it's my response to the situation, irrespective
of his or her behaviour, and then we start focusing on our
response.
SO: They will say 'if you speak like this, then naturally I
will respond like this'. How do you still change?
SS: So that is the realisation. 'You speak like this' but now
I will choose how I am going to respond. The equation has
changed. I got a phone call from a twenty-four-year- old
married woman, standing on the terrace of her house wanting
to jump down. As a last resort she just called up and said,
'I don't want to live and I was about to jump down, but I
thought I will just call up and find out if you have a solution.
My husband is having an affair with somebody in the office
and he wants to divorce me. I see no reason to live. She was
totally shattered. 'What about my parents, society and others?"
At that moment I was speechless. I said, 'Okay, first come
down. So what is it that you want? She said, 'I want everything
to be back to normal like it was. I want my family life, my
married life to be what it was.' I said, create a thought that
everything is fine'. She said, 'but everything is not fine. I said,
'I know, but what do you want?" 'I want everything to be
fine. I said, 'now create a thought that everything is fine and
my husband is absolutely fine; nothing wrong has happened'.
For 10 days or so, we were talking daily for almost an hour
on the phone. She used to say, 'everything is not fine how 
can I create this thought that everything is fine? What should
I do? Should I go and talk to that girl? Should I go and talk 
to that girl's parents? Should I go and talk to my husband's
parents, what should I do? I had to repeatedly get her back
to creating the same thought, that everything was fine.
Finally she started working on changing her thought; she
said 'everything is fine, my husband is absolutely fine, nothing
wrong has happened'. She stopped crying also, eventually she
became more stable. Now when her husband came back from
work, she wouldn't be crying or weeping; this provoked him
even more. He would be abusive and find more faults with
her because he was trying to justify his own action. She had
to remain stable and just keep telling herself that 'everything
is okay, I am in charge of the situation, and I am in charge
of myself'. After one month her husband handed over the
divorce paper to her; he said that his company was sending
him to the USA and that the other girl working in the offce
was also going. They were going to get married there. She
called me up and told me what happened. Then she surprised
me by saying, 'you know I am fine, I think I will be able to
take care of myself. I will take up a job and I will be able to
live with my parents.' In one month she had changed her
thoughts. The situation was the same as it was one month
before, but she had changed her thoughts. She just worked
hard on herself. The husband left.
Two months later he called up from the USA and said
he wanted to come back. She called me up and asked 'what
should I do? I asked, what do you want? She said, I want
everything to be back to normal.
SO: That's what she always wanted.
SS: Yes. And today it's more than four years since that episode.
They have a lovely daughter too. All the effort was made by
her. It's only that she had to take up the
challenge; it's a little extra effort initially.
SO: Did you feel a sense of failure when the husband
was leaving the next day and they did not patch up?
SS: It was not a failure. We were not looking at the situation;
we were only concerned about her being able to take charge of
her own state of mind. Situations are not in our control. We
expect that spirituality or religion will change our problems.
No, they won't. Problems are going to come, challenges are going
to come, obstacles are going to come; spirituality gives me the
power to take charge of myself and then face the situation.
SO: But when she was creating the thoughts that
everything is fine, she was trying to change the situation.
SS: She was changing her thoughts
SO: By changing the situation in her imagination.
SS: It's not imagining. Everything is fine here (in my mind);
it's here first. I have to be okay; everything is fine.
SO: But what kind of visualisation did you give her? You
said 'just think that everything is fine; nothing is wrong'
SS: If a partner or a child is drifting away in a relationship
what's the energy that we send out to them? Anger or hurt
Someone is already drifting away and we are sending out
negative energy. It will only take them further away. If you
want the person to come back, you have to send powerful
positive energy. For that we need to stop being critical and
judgmental about that person. We need to respect them as
we always did, and so we need to create the thought that
nothing wrong has happened. From the other person's
perspective, they have logic for what they are doing; we may
find it wrong but they have a reason. I have spoken to
many families where there is a conflict between partners or
between parent and children. If you talk to both parties, you
will never be able to decide who is right and who is wrong
because none of them is wrong. You listen to one and you will
say, 'perfect, this person is absolutely right'. Then you listen
to the other person and what they say seems to be making
sense as well. It's just that each one is right from their own
perspective. Now all that we have to do is show them each
other's perspective.
SO: We can approach the situation with understanding
and knowledge.
SS: I will tell you about this couple. The wife had been living
separately for the last three months because the husband used
to beat her. The physical violence had been happening for
10 years; finally she took her daughter and left. She met
me to see if any solution was possible. She was constantly
weeping while she was talking about it. I asked her how
her husband's childhood had been. She said it was not
pleasant; he was a single child to working parents, who did
not have much time for him, and he had been very lonely.
What I understood was that the husband felt he had not
got love from others around him; in his wife he found one
person whom he could call his own, and the way he showed
power and control over his wife was violence. It was actually
because he was insecure and possessive, and he was in a lot
of pain inside. Now, instead of hatred she was filled with
sympathy. She said, my husband was in pain all this while,
and I thought I was the one who was in pain. This reality
changed her, and now they are healing each other. It's not
that the situation is solved in one day because the husband
says he doesn't know what happens to him. Such things
happen because of some mind block inside. It's just that
we need to be able to detach ourselves from our position,
go to their position, and see what could be the reason for
their behaviour. But what happens is when the husband does
something wrong to the wife, the wife only feels her own
hurt. She fails to understand what the husband is going
through, and vice versa.
SO: What if both of them had a bad childhood?
SS: The wife was constantly weeping. She kept telling the
husband 'promise me that you will never hit me again, only
then will I go home. The husband said 'I promise I will try'
She said 'no, give me a guarantee that you will never do it
again. So I told the lady, you guarantee that you are never
going to cry again.' She promptly said l will try. It's so easy
to tell other people to change because we don't have control
over our own sanskar.
SO: But can we change the sanskars?
SS: Yes, definitely, by understanding and seeing what the
reason is.
SO: How can I find the reason within me? It takes 'you'
to find it or can 'I' find it? Suppose I get angry very easily,
how do I know what kind of sanskars I have? Will I have
to go through my past?
SS: Definitely you need to see your past. Suppose someone has
had a troubled childhood- the parents were critical, physically
abusive, etc. The child always has to keep proving himself,
and still keep going through pain because of the criticism
received. Now as this child grows up, he builds a defense
mechanism. He does not want to go through the hurt and
pain, and so he becomes loud and aggressive. Before anyone
can say anything to him, he will shout at people. People will
fear him. This is a protection wall that the person builds so
that no one can ever say anything to him, but inside he is
an innocent, fearful and hurt child.
SO: He had gone through some situations that he could
not fight.
SS: Not only that, the child experienced hurt at that time.
Now the child doesn't want to get hurt again, and this will
be so even when he is 30, 40 or 50 years old. Now when this
person starts working on himself and says I will not get hurt
even if someone says something, he becomes strong insideNow he can drop this artificial defense mechanism and be
his natural, polite, sweet self to everyone.
SO: So all these things can be overcome by being aware
of your thoughts. By being aware, you also detach, don't
you?
SS: Absolutely, because we get detached our self from our own
perspective. Like in the case of this couple, the wife could see
only her perspective, 'how can my husband hit me, he does
not love me, he does not respect me. What she is feeling is
right, but she can see only her perspective. When she detached
from her perspective, she was able to see her husband's pain
and his perspective; she became stable. Her hatred turned
into sympathy.
We all talk about understanding people. We say we cannot
understand the other person, which means we just cannot see
their perspective because we are so attached to ours.
Earlier we could see the situation only from our side, and
from our side it was totally different. For me to be able to
see from your side I have to get up from this chair and then
come and sit on that chair. For that I have to detach myself
from this chair; I am so stuck to my position, to my ideas
of right that I can't even get up from here. When I get up
to be on your side, that's empathy and understanding, and
that's a relationship.
SO: You were mentioning the other day that when a
person is empty within, he becomes angry. What do
you mean by emptiness within?
SS: Vacuum. Many people will tell you that they have everything
in life, professionally, personally, materialistically. But inside
there is something amiss. They are not even very sure what
they are talking about.
SO: You mean to say there is some kind of a search, some
kind of an emotional fulfilment they are looking for?
SS: All that we were doing, studying, working, achieving, 
even our relationships, we were doing it all to get happiness
and contentment. At the age of 30 or 40, we realise that
we have got everything but we are still experiencing stress
anger and anxiety. So I am empty in the sense that what I
wanted I haven't got, even though I got the whole list that
I thought would give me contentment. Then I say I am
empty. While achieving this success, we compromised a lot.
That compromise made us empty. Peace is our nature, but we
created anger. Honesty is our nature but we compromised on
that a number of times in order to achieve success. Humility
is our nature but created ego to feel powerful. Every time we
were doing these things, we were going against our natural
personality.
SO: So you feel bad about it, perhaps guilty too.
SS: Not only feel bad now, we think of how the journey
has been. Let's say this glass is full. Now I am on a journey
towards success but I have to take care that the glass should
not spill. If I keep spilling the glass during the journey, some
10 years later I would have achieved success but the glass will
be empty by the time I reach there. Then I will say that l am
empty because I created so much anger and resentment. I did everything posible to achieve that success. It doesn't mean
that success is wrong; just that I should have taken care of
this glass while moving towards success.
SO: But even before moving towards success we were
empty, weren't we?
SS: No, look at a child - so contented. That's whats so
attractive about the child. We teach the child that in order
to be happy he has to get more marks; in order to come first
he has to get tensed and compete with his friends. Look at
the child when the child is sleeping - such serenity.
