
SO: You say it is 'I' who create happiness, I
who create sadness. It's finally I who is responsible. Yet
it's very difficult to be happy when you have not achieved
something in life.
SS: There are two dynamics here: one, if I achieve this then
I will be happy, and another, I will be happy while achieving
this. Its like we are on a journey, say from X to Y, and Y is
the destination whether we are going by road, by train, or
by air. When we start on the journey, others wish us a safe
journey, not 'reach your destination anyways. It's not only
reaching the destination that matters, it's the quality of the
journey that counts.
SO: That's how many of us think that we have to reach our
destination by hook or by crook.
SS: Okay, let's look at it this way. I have set a goal for myself,
whether it's for marks as a student, for a professional position
in my organization, or it could be in my relationships. In an
case, we are not going to be able to lead our lives without
goals, because without goals we will become passive. I wouldn't
know where I am heading. Now, the other thing that I do is
tell myself that I will be happy when I reach the goal.
goal may take six months or six years. So I start moving to
say, reach this particular position in my organization in the
coming two years. Now I start my journey. It is about the
way I work, the way I am with my colleagues, the way I am
performing. Continuously, at the back of my mind I believe
that when I reach there I will be happy. Now if there is a
little lapse in the way I am working, if people around me are
uncooperative, if there are certain obstacles coming in the
way, what will happen to me?
SO: I will not be happy.
SS: Because I will create stress, I will create anxiety. Why?
Because people are coming in the way of my happiness. I see
them as obstacles not just in my goal, but also in my happiness
Now suppose that I am going to walk from here to there and
my mind says happiness is there. I start walking. While I am
walking you are in the way, and because you are in the way
I see you as someone in the way of my happiness. I will do
anything to get you out of the way. If you are just a junior
I will shout at you and order you to work fast. If you are a
colleague and I think you are a threat to me in my reaching
the goal, I can plot anything against you to get you out of the
way. I may even compromise on my values. Suppose during
my journey you tell me that if I am honest I'll have to stop
here for one week, but if I tell a lie I can go there faster. Now,
many of us wouldn't even think twice before using the other
method. I might end up telling a lie and that's where I will
compromise on my values and principles during my journey.I
have begun to think that my values and principles are delaying
my process of attaining my happiness.
SO: But if you are going to get happiness, how does it matter
if you were to lie?
SS: At this moment we are still on the journey; we haven't
reached the destination yet. While on the journey, I am creating
anger and stress, and I am compromising on my values and
principles. So, I am creating negative emotions in the course of
my journey. For six months I create anxiety and stress, which
in turn can disturb my relationships and create issues with
people at work. My inner state of mind will be in an upheaval,
and eventually it will start affecting my physical health. Finally
after six months when I reach my goal, how will I feel?
SO: Don't you think you will be happy?
SS: If I have created all these negative emotions on the way I
have experienced and have also transmitted the same emotions
to everyone around me; all this happened on the journey. It's
like I have fallen down, hurt myself, and then reached there
By the time I reached there, I am totally in pain. But because
I have reached there I am very happy. Now my conditioning
says happiness is dependent on achievement
SO: You want to achieve further. The driving force becomes
achieve-achieve-achieve,' and you are caught up in its pursuit,
You go home and say oh, I'm so sorry I have been behaving
like this, coming home late at night, troubling you, but I
have to achieve the target?
SS: So, if for example you set a six-month goal, for the whole
of six months you are allowing yourself to get bruised and
hurt emotionally
SO: This means we are not just postponing happiness, we
are actually creating unhappiness all the way. And this is
going to multiply.
SS: Exactly. In the first six months, to reach (A) I was bruised
because I created negative emotions around me, hurt people, lost
my temper, whatever. By the time I reach (A), my emotional
strength has already become weaker. During the next journey
from (A) to (B), my strength is already weakened. It is the
same environment, the same people, the same situations, but
the weak emotional strength means I am going to get bruised
further.
SO: Is it emotional strength?
SS: My power to face situations. I will get hurt more easily,I
will react, I will get irritated.
SO: Don't you think all these things also make you physically
weak?
SS: It's going to have an effect on the body, but when we are
young we don't feel the impact. So we think it is absolutely
fine, this is natural, this is the way to live. It's only later that we
start showing symptoms of hypertension, diabetes and similar
troubles. Since we accept stress as a part of our lives we also
accept the physical symptoms as inevitable.
SO: I still can't understand how someone can be happy
without achieving his goal. He comes home as a failure, and
with so many problems
SS: Let's say I am looking for a job and I have been trying
for the last six months. I am not getting a job and I am very
demotivated and upset. As a friend, what would you say to me?
SO: Don't worry, it happens. One day you will get it.
Meanwhile please let me know if I can be of help.
SS: If I say how can I not be worried, I haven't got a job for
the last six months, what are you going to say to me?
SO: By worrying will you get it?
SS: So just lets say this to ourselves: by worrying will l get it
SO: That is very easily said
SS: But that's the solution. The more I worry, the weaker my
mind becomes; it starts to show in my body language; I lose
my enthusiasm and I get thoughts like how will I get a job? To
get a job I need confidence, I need to be enthusiastic, I need
to be ready to face the challenges the new job offers. It's not
about what has happened, it's about what I need to do now
how does my state of being have to be. I have to take care
of that, else I am trapped in the vicious cycle of negativity.
Who is going to employ a person who is demotivated and has
given up on life? Who do you think will hire a person who
has lost his internal strength and tolerance, who is unable to
get along with people, and is not able to create team spirit?
Who is going to hire a candidate like that? So, whatever the
situation may be and however challenging it may be, I am
not going to get the solution unless I take care of myself
My business is not doing well and so it is natural for me to
worry, but if I worry I will still not be able to do well. If I
want to do well outside, I will have to be well within. But
what is most important is: even if I don't do well, at least I
can take care of myself.
SO: I had a guru who told me about a man who was
undergoing a prolonged struggle due to a court case. At the
same time he was also worried about his wife, who was very
sick. Finally, after about 15 years he won the court case and
his wife too recovered. But then he himself fell sick and died.
Despite knowing of this humbling tale, why is it so difficult
for me to understand what you are telling me right now?
SS: It's about priorities in life. What are my responsibilities in
life? Normally I will count my family, my job, my work, my
home, my friends, my relatives, my society, my relationships,
my country..
We can take responsibility of our family and move on to
the entire world, but not our own responsibility. Let's say we
are a family of five and four of them are not well. I want to
take the responsibility of taking care of them, of healing them,
but I will only be able to do that if I am healthy myself. This
is about physical health. Now you apply the same equation
to emotional health; I want to take care of my children, my
wife, my husband, my parents; I want to ensure that they are
happy.. but I am in pain.
SO: I even get sad when they are not able to do well in class.
I wanted them to become swimming champions, tennis
players, and so on.
SS: Why do you want to do all that? just so that they will be
happy! Finally, I want everyone around me to be happy.
SO: And if they are happy, I will be happy.
SS: I thought I would take care of everything and then they
will be happy; and when they are happy, then I will be happy.
Spirituality teaches us that when I am happy and I am able to
take care of them, then they will also be happy.
SO: So when I am happy, I am also spreading my happy
emotions around. Wherever I go I am alive with happiness
and I make other people happy too.
SS: Because you make them stronger. Let's see, what is happiness?
Happiness is an internal strength. It does not mean excitement,
I am not going to be jumping and dancing the whole day. I
have lost my job and I am not excited about it.
SO: Happiness is strength I am not able to understand this.
SS: See, at any given point in time, there can only be one
thought in the mind. One thought possesses one quality. That
one quality could be either the right quality or the not-so-right
quality. If I am creating a pure, powerful and positive thought,
then it is the right quality. If I am creating a negative thought,
an unpleasant thought, a thought of anxiety, pain and worry
its a wrong thought. If it's the right thought I feel good; if it's
not the right thought I feel low. If it's the right thought, then
I feel good and that is stability. If it is not the right thought,
I feel low and that is weakness
SO: So, stability is strength.
SS: If you are stable, you are strong. This strength will then
shape the way you respond to situations. Like, you said, I want
my child to have good marks. Okay, I want my child to have
good marks but it is not necessary that this will happen every
time. When he fails to get the marks I expect him to get or
the marks he is capable of getting, what is my state of mind? I
am upset. Is that good for me? No. Is that good for my child?
No. Then why am I creating it? The marks did not create my
feelings, rather I was the creator of what I felt.
SO: But I would have thought it was just normal to be upset
and feel sad.
SS: Once I get upset, my child also gets upset. My child gets
demotivated and I expect him to do well in that demotivated
state of mind. The energy that i am giving to those around
me is not positive, and that's why I am not fulfilling my
responsibility in the right way. When my child gets less marks,
my responsibility should be to first take charge of my mind
I have to remain composed so that I don't react immediately
by shouting at him. Next, my responsibility is to take care of
his state of mind, and finally I carefully explain to him that he
needs to study responsibly and get good marks the next time.
SO: So what we usually end up offering our child is the
opposite. We deplete his energy, lower his self-esteem, an
make him feel small. I think that's why suicides among
children are prevalent today.
SS: A big reason why a child commits suicide is that he is not
able to face his parents after the failure. It is not because he
failed; it is because he doesn't want to see his parents unhappy
and he holds himself responsible for their unhappiness. The
parents had conditioned and pressured him throughout the 
year that they would be happy only when he succeeded
SO: I thought it was my responsibility to see to it that my child
achieved his goal - whether in studies, sports, or whatever
else. I realize that I have been doing just the opposite.
SS: Every individual's life is based on four aspects: physical
intellectual, emotional and spiritual. It is about my physical
health, my intellectual development, my emotional state of
being and my spiritual health. If I want to be successful in life
and if I want my children to be successful in life - successful
in the whole sense, then all the four aspects need to be equally
balanced. When I consider my responsibilities toward my child, I
take into account his academic performance and extracurricular
performance, and I take care of his physical health. My child
should get the best home, the best food, the best exercise and
so on. With regard to his social well-being, I want him to have
good friends and indulge in extracurricular activities. But how
is my child feeling inside? We are not really considering and
taking care of that aspect. Physically and academically he may
be doing very well, but the constant pressure, the constant
comparison with other people, and the constant criticism that
he gets from his parents are actually depleting his emotional
strength. So I have to ask myself whether I am fulfilling my
responsibility. Tomorrow he could grow up to be a good doctor
or a senior lawyer, and be physically very strong, but if he is
emotionally not strong, will he be a good human being? And
if he is not a good human being, a pure and powerful being
will he really be happy?
SO: What happens if he is emotionally not very strong?
SS: If I am a good doctor, technically I am good. But if I am not emotionally strong, then I will get irritated very easily, I
will react easily,I will not empathize with my patients and
my colleagues. I will not get along with people because I am
intolerant. Can I stil call myself a good doctor?
While we were growing up they only taught us how to read,
how to write, how to speak. No one taught us how to think.
SO: But that's what happens. We knew only
about IQ; EQ came into the picture much later.
SS: There is no doubt that your IQ is important, but so is your
emotional strength. The emotionally strong person can handle
all struggles and challenges of life. With a strong IQ we need
emotional strength to achieve success.
SO: When I was, growing up I remember that, adults often
slapped children to teach them, even at schools. If they scored
less marks, they felt scared to share those marks at home.
SS: Right. So we need to ask ourselves whether we are fulfilling
all our responsibilities suitably. It is not enough to fulfil one
responsibility by getting them to perform well. What about
my second responsibility of making the child a strong human
being? Life is going to present a lot of challenges. Today your
child has passed with the highest marks and come first in
class, but will his marks help him face all the challenges in life?
SO: Maybe emotionally he is so weak that he will not be
able to compete with other things in life.
SS: Exactly. If he has to face even a small failure, he will not
be able to cope up. What if he has to work with people with
whom he cannot adjust? We did not take care of that aspect.
Why? The prime reason is that we had not taken care of that
aspect in our own lives. We ignored the importance of being
emotionally healthy. We thought our responsibility is to take
care of everything external, whether in our lives or the lives
of those for whom we were responsible.
SO: Most men feel that their responsibility is to earn money
and when they do that their job is done.
SS: The husband feels he has fulfilled all the needs of the family
Now if he has given them all of this, then they should be happy
because happiness is supposed to be coming from outside.
SO: We give them good toys, good clothes, good food, etc.,
we have done our duty. Now if they don't study, that's their
problem. We easily put it to sanskaras, their school, or peer
pressure. We keep on blaming other people.
SS: Because you are not ready to take that responsibility. It's easy
to earn and to send your child to the best school, to give him
the best food and the best home, and the best of everything,
but it's a huge challenge to make your child emotionally strong.
SO: The most important thing I have to realise is that first I
have to be emotionally strong.
SS: So it's time to do that now. While taking care of our
children we always need to remember, we can send our child
to the best school without having gone to school ourselves.
We can ensure that our children eat well, even if we sleep
empty stomach. But it is not possible to make our children
happy without being happy ourselves. You cannot make your
child emotionally strong without being emotionally strong
yourself, so that's where the responsibility comes to find it
first in yourself.
