SO: We have been speaking about awareness,
thought and mind. After practicing it, I started speaking softly
(I usually speak loudly) and my hand movements were not
jerky. Everything felt peaceful, light and stable.
SS: That goes to prove that if you take care of the mind,
everything else is taken care of. It is the mind that has an
effect on the body. It is the mind that creates the words and it
is the mind that finally comes out into actions. When we are
talking about transformation I want to change this habit, I
want to change this part of my personality; I want to change
this particular behaviour - we always try to bring about the
transformation outside. The way I walk, the way I talk, the
way I speak to people, the way I behave.. we tell others
also to behave like this or that. This transformation is always
temperary because the seed is the thought. Not changing the
thought it self will have a temporary effect; the change will last
for a few days and then we are back to the old self. However
if I change the thought, I won't even be aware but suddenly I 
will find so much transformation outside
SO: So we won't need to work on each and every aspect of
our body, our movement, our speech, the way we look, the
way we talk. It is just like what an actor does in method
acting. Method acting teaches us to go from within to the
outside. Once I start believing that I am so and so, then
I don't have to check on my walk, on the way I speak, it
happens naturally once I believe in it.
SS: I am creating the character inside; the whole sketch is there
inside. Who does this inner work? The mind does.
SO: When you believe in it, then things follow. You are not
acting anymore; you are living, you are playing.
SS: You are naturally flowing. Similarly, I am a peaceful being.
I have created the character inside, so now I don't have to take
care of how to speak, how to walk, how to behave. Once I 
am convinced inside that I the actor - am a peaceful being,
then everything that the actor will do will be through the
vibration of peace.
SO: So that means I should play the role of a peaceful
personality. Think about myself as a peaceful being, happy being...
SS: You have to come back to the root first. I the peaceful being
has this name, this body and plays this role. Whether its
an actor, a doctor, a lawyer, it doesn't matter what the role is.
SO: So the peaceful being doesn't have to learn each
every step since he is peaceful.
SS: Each one of us is an actor and playing so many roles. In
your lifetime....
In your lifetime, let's say you played three hundred roles
but every role had that stamp of you as the actor - only you
played it in that way. Even if another actor copies you and
plays the same roles, he will be different from you because he
has his own style. So the actor's personality will always reflect
in every role he plays. So now I have to remember, who am
I the actor and what are the roles I play? So whichever role
I play - a father, a husband, a friend, a boss the actor's
personality has to show in every role. Now who am I the actor?
I am a pure, peaceful, love-full being. And it doesn't matter
whether I am talking to a friend or whether I am talking to
my son, the peaceful personality will be there in both. The
reason I am different with different people is that here I am
a friend, and there I am a father.
SO: I have to play a father here, so I will order my child.
SS: So I am more conscious of the role rather than the actor
who is playing the role. Old belief systems tell me that a father
should be like this. So I am behaving according to some set
patterns of how a father should be. A father should always be
authoritative, controlling and strict.
SO: If I am different with one person, speak differently to
the other person, it means I am behaving in contrast to my
character? There is no consistency?
SS: I am only role-conscious. I am a friend of this person, so
I should speak like this. Here I am the boss, so this is the way
to behave with my juniors. The actor inside is just not aware.
SO: But everybody behaves differently at
different places and times. One is different in office, at home,
with wife, with friends, and so on.
SS: Which one of these is our original nature?
SO: I don't know which one is original. I am confused. There
are so many different roles.
SS: Let's take a simple example. We walk into an office and
within 10 minutes we meet four people: one from the security,
one at the reception, then someone in middle management, and
finally the top chairman. Four people in 10 minutes, and four
times our behaviour changes. My way of talking to the security
guard and my way of talking to the chairman are different.
Out of these four which one is my original personality?
SO: I am confused. I am playing different roles all the time.
I don't have a consistent role.
SS: My original personality is not there because I am changing
every time. I talked to a security guard, I talked to a receptionist,
and accordingly I changed. Next I talked to a manager and so I changed; then I talked to a chairman, and again I changed.
I'm connecting to positions, to status, to physical looks, to all
the things that are acquired
SO: But if I ask this question to anybody, they will say what
is wrong in doing that. So isn't it normal, since everybody
does it?
SS: We don't know if it's normal, but yes, we have been doing it
for a very long time. We are talking and connecting to people
on the basis of everything that's acquired. Today you are the
chairman, tomorrow you are not, so tomorrow my relationship
with you will change. In that case, that was not a relationship
at all. And that's why relationships are so fragile. I can change
the minute anything that you have acquired has changed. We
are forgetting who we are. This acquired self is the ego; acquired
by knowledge, by position, by wealth, by property. Everything
that I have acquired, it's not me, it belongs to me. But when
I am in the consciousness of this is what I have acquired
and this is what you have acquired, it is the acquired who
are talking to each other. And that's why there isn't a strong
foundation; it's the ego of one talking to the ego of the other.
When egos are talking, it is a position talking to a position,
a bank balance talking to another bank balance. What about
the pure being talking to another pure being?
This is where we really need to stop and realize that we
are always connecting only to the outside, while the actor is
sleeping inside. Even if I find that the actors around me are
sleeping and I wake up, the others will wake up gradually
When you are doing theatre, what do you do when one actor
forgets his lines?
SO: I either use his line or give him a cue, or try to help
out or improvise it so that the act goes on.
SS: But for you to be able to do that, what do you have to
concentrate on first? Suppose I am the actor and I forget my
script. For you to help me with my part, you will have to first
pay attention to your script, right? You have two options. One,you pay attention to your script and just flow in the right way
so that I will get the cue and I will also start flowing in the
right direction. Two, you get affected by the fact that I have
forgotten my script, because of which your attention deviates
from your script and you are more interested in telling me
how I should be speaking, what I should be speaking.
Now, in the whole day, check how much are we concentrating
on other peoples script what they should be doing, what
they should be saying, how they should be behaving. In the
process we are not aware of our own script, what I should
be thinking, what I should be saying. Throughout the day, how
many times are we writing other people's script? We actually
sit in front of the television writing the script for the prime
minister, for the cricketer, for the film actor; they shouldn't
be acting like this, they shouldn't be wearing this, this is not
how they should have done this. We are just wasting time and
energy by trying and writing their script. Lets write only one
script - our script, because that is the only one that will be
followed. I can keep on writing your script how you should
be, how you should talk, how you should perform, how you
should behave. Are you going to go according to my script?
What a waste of time and energy! I am sitting and writing
the scripts of so many actors and none of them are going to
use my script.
SO: I find it so silly that I am doing something that is of
no use and wasting time.
SS: At a time you can write only one script; if I am writing
yours, I am definitely not writing mine. Look at it this way
You start saying something to me which I do not like; you start
shouting at me. Now, instead of taking care of how I should
be, I'm telling you this is not how you should be talking to me.
While I am trying to change your script I go out of control,
and soon I forget my own script and I am shouting louder
than you did. When I start to write your script and forget my
own lines, what will happen to the play?
SO: Disaster.
SS: That's what's happening everywhere around. If we just
start focusing on our script, everyone else will take their cue
Someone next to you is getting angry, has lost his temper,
is going out of control, but if you remain in control he will
soon come back into control because you have retained your
composure. You are writing your script and they will come back
to their original quality of peace. The other possibility is that
soon everyone will forget their script and go out of control.
This is a choice we need to make that of writing our own
script, because that's the only one that will be followed in any
case. The others will go into the category of waste thoughts.
So let's be aware of this, because this is awareness. I am aware
of how many times in the day I just keep thinking about what
other people should be doing and saying.
SO: But why can't I just stop myself and ask what is the
point, why am I wasting time?
SS: Now we will do it because we are aware; earlier we were
not aware, so we thought it was natural to think like that.
Its like you see a tap running and you immediately close it
because water is getting wasted.
SO: Our energy depletes, right?
SS: It depletes because we are thinking of something that is
not in our control.
SO: This reminds me of something interesting you said, 'For
each and every thought we have, there is some reaction in
the body'.
SS: The health of our body reflects the quality of our thoughts.
SO: Many things are clear to me now. Earlier I thought, what
is this, how is it possible, how can I not be angry when this
happens? It's so natural to be angry. I remember the time
when I didn't have money and I could not sleep all night
because someone who owed me money cheated on me. It
was so painful and I used to beat him up in my thoughts.
I ended up with high blood pressure.
SS: In this particular situation, someone has cheated you of
money. There's no denying that it's a grave situation and it's
natural for you to be upset and angry, but let us keep our loss
up till there. I have lost money but this is not in my control;
somebody else is responsible for the lost money. But what I
lose, is my peace of mind, health of my body, harmony in my
relationships, so there I am the reason.
Then I can say that he cheated me; it's because of him
I lost the money. But for anything else that I lose, I am the
reason, I am the cheater. This is what I do to myself
SO: I am being irresponsible. I thought it was natural.
SS: Just remember one thing: what I think I am doing to
others, I am actually doing it to myself. If I am giving a
cold shoulder to the other person, talking angrily to the
other person, it is actually a cold shoulder to me, it's anger
towards me, because whatever I am creating is first getting
created in my mind. This means I am the first one who
experiences it. The cold shoulder that I give you might not
affect you at all, but since I created the thought, I am bound
to get affected. So when you are doing something for other
people, good or bad, just remember that it's less for them
and more for yourself.
SO: A healthy thought, a healthy body, a healthy life.
SS: Nurture my pure thoughts, loving thoughts, forgiving
thoughts. Somebody has done something wrong, but I just
forgive and forget. I am not forgiving him I am forgiving
myself. If I keep holding on to the resentment and the hatred,
it's not for the other person, its here and it's in me. I am going
to be creating it and I am going to be experiencing it. So, the
entire responsibility comes back to me.
SO: The other day I met someone who told me
about the time when somebody cheated him of fifty thousand
rupees. It was a big amount for him. And you know what
his reaction was? He said, 'May God give him so much that
he does not repeat this act with anybody else; he must be in
need of money; may God give him ten times more so that
some other person is not cheated like I have been. After
about eight years, the man who cheated came back with
the money.
SS: Your acquaintance sent him good vibrations, good wishes, pure energy. The person came and returned him the money
after eight years; the question is what was the quality of the
mind for those eight years? Your acquaintance created this
thought that maybe the other person who took the money
needed it badly and was needy; he even blessed the person
saying that may he have much more; in other words he was
at peace. The other option for him was to harbour hatred,
resentment and revenge for eight years. He would still get back
the money after eight years, but in those years he would have
done so much damage to himself that the money would not
be able to repair it