SO: I have been speaking to a few friends and they mentioned
something called the u-stress meaning good stress. They
say we need that kind of stress and tension. One of my
friend's claims that he actually waits till he is stressed and
time is less, because then he works best. How should one
understand that?
SS: It's a belief system. It is something that we are hearing
everywhere around us that unless there is stress I will
not perform; if there is no stress I will become passive and
laidback. They call it the drive to perform, to achieve. So we
need to ask ourselves: is it really true? For that I need to ask
myself what is this stress and how do I feel when I experience
it. Imagine that I suddenly have a problem in my knee and it
starts paining, I am still walking but is it the same as I was
walking before, when everything was fine?
SO: No, there is pain now
SS: Naturally it's to going to be a little uncomfortable. However
I say this is okay, or even accept it as a natural part of ageing.
I keep walking and because I am not treating it or taking care
of it, the pain is constantly there and at times it is aggravated.
I am still managing my life, though. Now, suddenly I have to
run because of some reason. Will I be able to run with that
pain? I will not be able to. It's the same with stress. Stress
is in my mind; it is a little pain in the way I feel. How do I
feel when I experience stress? Even if I am not able to check
myself at the emotional level, let's just check the physical or
bodily parameters my heartbeat increases and so does my
pulse rate, at times my mouth goes dry, I start getting a very
uncomfortable feeling in the stomach, my head feels heavy, and so on. This is when the effect of the mind has already taken a
toll on the body, and it is a much later stage. Some students
fall ill on the day of their exams, with fever or nausea. Some
people start sweating or their mouth goes dry before a public
speech. This is the effect of the mind on the body.
SO: But I thought it was normal. The first time I was facing
a camera, my mouth and lips had all gone dry.
SS: Did you perform better?
SO: No, it was very bad.
SS: Lets say a child has to sit for an exam. Exam is a target and
a pressure. If he creates anxiety, does he perform better?
I remember when we used to give our exams and come back
and evaluate our own performance, we would point out places
where we knew the answer but made mistakes. We referred to
these as careless mistakes. What is a careless mistake? I know
the answer but I have written something else. And why have
I done it? Because there is no clarity, which is a state brought
about by the presence of anxiety
It's not carelessness. It has happened because I did not take
care of my mind. So there is no clarity in thinking, decision-
making power is affected, performance gets affected, my hands
tremble, and my speed of writing slows down. I may even say
that I didn't finish my exam
SO: So why do people say that they work best when they
are stressed and tensed, and when the deadline is looming
on their heads?
SS: Deadline means there is a target and target could be a
pressure. Target means I have to do this by so and so time.
If you remove that target I may take six days to complete the
same task. The minute you set a target, I start working faster.
Now, while I am working faster, what will happen if I start
creating thoughts along these lines how will I finish it by
tomorrow evening; if I don't finish it by tomorrow evening.
what will the consequence be? Will I be thrown out of my
job? Will my boss get angry with me? What if someone else
finishes it before I do? Does that mean they will have a better
chance for a promotion or a raise? If this happens, my career is finished! I am still performing, I am still working, but what is
going on in the mind? What is going on in the mind is stress;
negativity is the stress because it is creating an uncomfortable
feeling. The target is fine. Two people are given the same
target: they have to finish this job by tomorrow evening, both
are set to achieve it and they will. This means both will reach
destination but the journey will be different for each of
them.
One will think 'yes, I have to achieve this by tomorrow
evening, I will have nothing else but this work on my mind,
and I am going to do this. The second person will worry 'what if
something happens', or 'what if I don't achieve this: So, one
has reached the destination with stability, and the other has
done the same by creating stress. The end result is externally
the same, for both have performed, but internally the other
person is totally fatigued. This other person will conveniently
put blame on the pressure, and not realise that it is his own
creation in the face of pressure.
Stress in science has a simple formula:
stress = pressure ÷ resilience
Pressure, the numerator here, includes what's coming from
outside targets, exams, relationships, situations, traffic jams,
deadlines, etc. Resilience is my inner strength to face that
pressure. Consider the simple metal sheets used in industrial
applications. Different metal sheets are subjected to the same
amount of pressure, but the stress factor of every metal is
different because every metal sheet's power to face that pressure
is different
Now in the formula stress = pressure÷ resilience, we have
conveniently ignored the denominator and embraced the
conditioning of stress = pressure.
Its ignored, because I am not ready to take responsibility
of my inner strength. Hence, for me stress = pressure. If I
have an exam, obviously I will get tensed. If my boss is very
tough, obviously it is going to be a challenge for me because
stress = pressure.
SO: Do you think people like to be stressed? Why do we
accept it easily?
SS: When I am not able to tackle it, I just say it's natural or
inevitable.
SO: You mean to say it takes effort to not be stressed and
be happy in the situation?
SS: Yes! Suppose you say something to me that is not pleasant.
To get hurt is so easy
SO: Even at my age, I tend to think it's so natural to blame
others for how we feel.
SS: The weather changes. It's summer today, a couple months
later it will be winter. The weather changes and it gets chilly.
Do you say it's natural to fall ill since the weather has changed?
No! You open the cupboard and take out the woollens and
protect yourself.
We don't keep blaming the weather, do we? We protect
ourselves. Things are going to happen outside but because we
have not learnt the mechanism of how to protect ourselves,
we say it is natural to fall ill. It's natural to get hurt, to get
stressed, that's what we say.
Spirituality focusses on the denominator, that is resilience.
The pressure or the situation is not in my control. So the
numerator is not in my control. In any situation we can attribute
10% to the numerator, but the remaining 90% depends on my
power to cope. Because if there is no pressure, then there will
be no stress, so we give 10% responsibility to the pressure. The
remaining 90% is about the extent I take charge of how I am
going to handle that pressure.
SO: So, how I react to something is 90%. Somebody just hits
my car if it's an old car, I don't really get that upset; but
if it's a brand new one, I react. What do you say?
SS: How you react is your choice. Someone has hit your car
- the situation was not in your control. Now, you have two
ways to respond: 1) Get out of the car, create a scene, shout
at him, hit him, abuse him, have him respond in the same
manner, and have ten more people in the scene, or 2) wish
him good morning and a nice day
SO: And the other choice is to just smile and say it's okay.
In any case your car is insured.
SS: Yes! More important is the insurance of the mind. You
claim insurance and your car is repaired. But for the damage
that gets done inside you every time a situation arises, where
is the insurance for that and where are the repairs?
SO: I am more concerned that my car is damaged.
SS: The car is more important than my happiness on my
responsibility list, because I thought the car was my source of
happiness. Only when I make my state of being as my priority
will I start taking care of myself. First check if you are okay,
then check if everything outside of you is okay.
SO: If you don't help yourself, how can you help others?
But isn't this being a bit selfish?
SS: If I don't take care of myself, can I help you? All my time
and energy is spent in taking care of other people. What's the
result? Today I am under stress, and so are my children. Earlier,
depression was something that affected people when they were
60 and above; today we have school children with so many
issues and are frequenting counsellors and psychiatrists. If we
were fulfilling our responsibilities, this wouldn't be the result.
SO: We often say that the teachers are irresponsible, the
politicians are irresponsible, but thinking inwards I am the
most irresponsible person especially by not being responsible
for myself.
SS: First I have to be responsible. The ability to respond is
responsibility. My ability to respond in every situation is response + ability = responsibility
Imagine the irony of life - we are always trying to control
things that are not in our control, while ignoring the one
thing that is in our control. We say, 'oh, my mind is not in my
control, but that is the only thing that is in one's control. Going
back to the matter of two cars bumping into each other - if
you suggest to people that you can just say okay, never mind
and drive away, they might not agree. They strongly feel that
it is important to get out of the car and shout at the one who
made the mistake. You try and explain to them that it will be
damaging for them, that is they will be hurting themselves.
They will say but what about making the other person realise
their mistake.
SO: So that he won't repeat the mistake again. I am doing
him a favour.
SS: You see I am more interested in teaching others rather
than taking care of myself. Whether it's a small situation or
a big one, I have a choice of how I am going to respond. Let
me just sit back and be aware in every situation. If I just say
it's okay and drive on, how do I feel on that day?
SO: I would feel nice about it.
SS: Because you have conserved energy and conquered your own
weakness. So it is something that has to be experimented with.
SO: The other day I was going to the airport and somebody
banged my car. My driver was just about to get out and fight,
but I asked him to keep quiet, close the door and ignore
the other person. I felt nice about it. Right now, conversing
with you, I realize I felt nice because I kind of conquered
my weakness that has been there for years and years.
SS: Also, you had the right thoughts at that moment, so you
felt better. If you create the thought that 'it's okay, it's just an
accident, move on now' it's a positive thought. It's a good
feeling. But if I have thoughts like - why didn't he look where
he was driving; he should have been driving carefully; who
gives them their driving license; they think they own the road
- how are you going to feel after that? The thoughts you have
will determine your feelings. Then, after all this we reach our
destination, maybe we were headed to our workplace.
SO: And for how long will this kind of mood and the
agitation remain?
SS: Let's say I have to drive for about half an hour to work. So
the mood will stay with me for about half an hour. However, the
unfortunate part is, within the next half an hour, there will be
another situation. By that time my emotional immunity system
is already low and the chances of me reacting has increased.
Next I reach my office and my receptionist is not there on her
desk.... She has not come to office on time. Now yet another
situation confronts me. I go to my desk and see that the office
boy has not cleaned my table properly. One more situation. My
junior has not completed his work, which was supposed to be
there on my desk at 10 o' clock in the morning. So, situation
after situation unfolds, and I keep reacting. Every time I justify
my reaction by saying it is because of....
SO: ...this, this, this. I am right, I didn't do anything but
this happened, and it is natural.
SS: If you react, you are wasting and depleting your energy;
you are reducing your emotional strength. When you encounter
the next situation you will be weaker than before.
SO: Over a period of time it also becomes a habit. Then
you get high blood pressure and heart problems start an
so on. It takes a toll on our health.
SS: Today we say high blood pressure is natural because the
stress is natural, and the by-product of this stress will also
be natural. So everything that was unnatural gets labelled as
natural. And then we say we want happiness
SO: Tell me, what is the meaning of unlimited?
SS: That which is not dependent on any limited object, people
or situation. It's state of being is unlimited, unconditional,
and independent. It is free of dependencies and, therefore,
free of the fear of failure. Whenever there is dependency on
someone or something, the second thought instantly will be
of fear. What if I don't get it? I have immediately created
fear and as I create fear, the happiness is gone. You will find
people fearing happiness too when everyone in the house is
happy, someone will say 'don't be so happy, you never know
what's going to happen next'. They are so fearful that they are
scared to be happy today.
SO: Everything is temporary.
SS: Because it's all dependent on situations. Today the situation is
favourable, so you are happy, but you don't know what the next
situation is going to be. But, if your happiness is independent
of situations, then you can be happy 24 x 7
SO: You think we can be happy 24 x 7?
SS: It's possible and we can do it, but first we have to take care
of ourselves and take self-responsibility. But if it depends on
outside factors then it is occasional. The more the situations
become challenging; the more people's behaviours become
unpredictable. It becomes a struggle and that is why we start
accepting stress as natural, whereas it is happiness that is natural.