SO: I have been thinking about the hide-
and-seek that the mind plays. The moment I try to see
where it is, it vanishes; when I go to my thoughts in order
to be aware of them, the thoughts stop, and the moment
I am somewhere else, they come back to me. Where is
this mind and what is it? How may one control it in
day-to-day life? Is it through meditation?
SS: Let me share this story with you that I read a few days
back, about a disciple who goes to his guru and asks for one
word so that he can achieve what his guru has achieved. The
guru says 'awareness'. The disciple writes down the word on a
piece of paper and leaves, thinking he will do this now. When
he reaches halfway, he wonders ‘but what am I supposed
to do?' So he goes back and asks his guru, what does the
word mean? Guru says "awareness means awareness. The
disciple says okay and leaves again. But, after sometime he
comes back and asks, 'but what does it mean and what am I
supposed to do? The guru says, 'awareness means awareness - which means do not try and to find a logic behind it. Awareness means just be aware of your thoughts;
just watch your thoughts. We are aware of everything that is
happening in the world. We are aware of what is happening
under the ocean; we are aware of what is happening on the
moon; we are aware of what is happening on other planets;
we are aware of what is happening in the neighbour's house;
we are aware of what is happening everywhere. So, awareness
means to know what's happening. Now, awareness means just
to know what's happening...
SO: Within me?
SS: Nothing within. That again is very complicated. When
you say look within, it's very complicated. Look within, but
where? Look at what? What are we supposed to do? Look
within means just look at the thoughts that I create. Take a
walk early in the morning; its not about just looking at who is
walking, who is wearing what, who is listening to music, who
is talking about what, what has happened in the newspaper;
just talk to yourself. What am I thinking? You can practise
this the whole day.
SO: People will say this guy is talking to himself and has
gone mad.
SS: You won't come to know when I am talking to myself. Just
stop and check - What am I thinking?
SO: But the moment I stop to check what I am thinking,
that thought stops. Some other thought then takes over me
away for the next few hours, before I come back to what I
was thinking
SS: This is because I haven't done it in a very long time. Once
I do it regularly, I won't need to stop and look at what I am
thinking. I will always be aware of what I am thinking. Suppose
today has not been a nice day at work; so I come back and I
am sitting with the paper. The television is on but my mind
is working - it's not interested in the running television. I am
thinking - this shouldn't have happened, this is not the way
things should have happened today, this is not the way they
should have spoken to me. I have been working so hard, but
I just don't get recognised for my work. Who is thinking all
this? I am thinking. That's all; this is awareness; this is what
I am thinking. The second stage of awareness is: is this the
right kind of thinking for me? And third stage of awareness
is: can I change it? That's all.
SO: What will happen if I am not thinking? I have to think
something.
SS: Yes, there is never a stage when we are not thinking.
SO: Either some kind of song goes on, or some kind of a
jingle, or something said by somebody .. it goes on and on;
the mind is all the time on. And you mean to say one has to
switch it over to something else, to feed it something else
SS: It's like water, flowing constantly. I can't stop it but I can
always channelize it; I don't have to flow this side, I can flow
the other side. So I just change the direction of the water, give
it a new direction to flow. Similarly, I dont stop thinking. A
lot of people think meditation means to stop thinking,
and so will concentrate on a point of light and say 'no thoughts
- no thoughts - no thoughts. 'I don't have to think' is also a
thought.
It can never happen. The mind can never stop thinking
We are trying to do something that is not natural. That's why I
say I am feeling very heavy here. There is too much of pressure
here because I have tried to suppress something. It's not natural
SO: So much pressure to stop thinking that you are going
to get up tired and disappointed
SS: Exactly. I have not been able to achieve it and then I say
I tried meditation but couldn't do it. It happens with many
people. There is so much going on in the mind, it is like a
car that is in the fifth gear and I suddenly want to bring it
down to neutral. I am trying to do it in one go. What's going
to happen? I get a jerk
SO: Shall we go back a little? You said be aware - okay,
I start being aware. Then what happens? I just honestly want
to know what happens practically.
SS: Practically, the first thing that happens is knowledge
SO: You said be aware - okay, I start being aware. Then what
happens? Now I am aware that I am speaking to you. This
is my thought and my question. So now that I am aware of
my thought, what next?
SS: First thing is to be aware that I am creating this thought.
A very common illusion is that the thought is coming to me
because of some stimulus. You know, a lot of people use this
language: 'that thought just came to me'. What does it mean?
SO: He reminded me of that, he made me think, he made
me do. The language is wrong?
SS: Yes! The expression is all wrong because the belief systems
are confused inside. 'I was just hit by those feelings, by those
thoughts.' As if something comes from outside.... Thoughts
don't come to us; feelings don't come from outside. However
tough the situation may be, I am the creator of the thought
The minute I understand I am the creator of the thought, the
blame game is over
SO: So I am aware of my thought. The next step is to know
that I am the creator of this thought. Then I will analyse
why waste a thought. It is such a bad thought, it's going to
hurt me, disturb me. Let me improve on this. Am I right?
SS: Absolutely. I will be able to change the thought once I
have taken the responsibility that I am the creator.
SO: Responsibility is hard work. I may say I am ready to
take responsibility but I never really understand it.
SS: Because the focus is so much outside. The attention is always
outside. We were aware of what is happening outside. Then
we felt things happening inside. But because we were focused
on the outside, we were not aware that what was happening
inside was our creation and we had a choice.
SO: I remember what you told me once. Suppose a child
hits a table and falls. You say this table is to blame and it
is a bad thing let's beat this table. The child feels better
when you say this; he doesn't even understand that it's his
mistake. So the conditioning of such a thinking begins in
childhood. This table is in the wrong place.
SS: This is true. I should be made to understand that the table
is where it is supposed to be; it is I who failed to see the table
while playing.
Yes, I have to understand this. Let's say my boss shouted
at me this morning. I had worked very hard; I was sincere; I
finished everything on time. But he still shouted at me. My
mind starts, 'He just doesn't respect sincerity; he doesn't know
how to appreciate and motivate his people. These thoughts are
coming to me; it is how I feel. And who is responsible for this?
It's my boss, and I am justified in thinking like this. Then I say
my boss needs to change. And there goes the self-awareness
and the inner responsibility.
SO: So if I am aware first, then I will know that I am creating
this thought towards my boss and I am also sending out
negative energy to him. Then, while sending this energy
to him, I am also creating so much negative energy within
me. So it is all give-and-take of negative energy and I am
surrounded with that.
SS: Not only that, the energy that I am creating and sending to
him is also affecting those around me. My family, with whom
I am sitting at home in the evening, is feeling that energy too
because I am creating it. You know, it's like a perfume. Like it
or not, I do get the smell of the perfume that you use. That's
why if we are under stress we automatically pass it on to our
children
SO: This reminds me of something quite interesting. When I am stressed and angry and come home in that state
of mind, my dog, instead of greeting me, just goes into
a corner.
SS: Now we will just change the way we think. In the whole
day we are creating about 40 to 50 thousand thoughts. This
translates into 25 to 30 thoughts per minute, created without
awareness. Every time we say this is coming to me. So one
can imagine what quality of life one is living. It's like you are
the chairman of a company that has 40,000 to 50,000 products
coming out of the factory on a daily basis and you are not
aware of the product quality. Hence, there is chaos.
Broadly, we can classify thoughts into four types. Pure,
powerful, positive thoughts are one category. They will be
absolutely clean and selfless. These attributes are rare today
Selfless means thinking more about the needs and happiness,
etc. of other people than about your own, with no expectation
attached. Wherever there will be an expectation it will be
followed by hurt, so it's not positive anymore. Negative thoughts
Resentment, hatred, criticism, anger, and these come in large
numbers. Necessary thoughts: I have to do this, I have to go
here, I have to meet so and so. They are neither positive nor
negative; they are neutral. But let's be careful that the neutral
does not get followed by the negative. Let's say I have to go to
the airport: It's a necessary thought. 'I hope there is no traffic
jam on the way; I hope I will reach in time. So, a neutral
thought may be followed by negative thoughts. The neutral
thought will be one but it is followed sometimes by a series of negative thoughts. The fourth type of thought is waste thoughts, 
things that are not in my control. Thinking about that which
is not in my control is a waste of time and energy - that is I
am thinking either about the moment that has passed or about
a moment that is still to come. Both are not in my control.
The past and the future are not in my control.
SO: Past, future, or thinking about other people, they are
a waste.
SS: Even when I am thinking about other people - they should
have done this, why did they do this, I want them to do this - 
it's either in the past or in the future. I don't accept them
in the present moment as they are. If we just practise this for
one day, if we are just aware about this for one day, we will
be shocked. At any moment just check what you are thinking.
You will be thinking either about something that has
already happened or about something that is still to happen.
So we are living either in the past or in the future. Both are
a waste because both are not in my control.
SO: I remember once I was driving home from my shooting
and was thinking of my scene that I had just rehearsed. I
was driving alone and thinking. I wish I had done that. As
the scene kept playing in my mind, I crossed my home. I
had to take a U-turn and go back.
SS: Actually we can cross our whole life if we are like this,
thinking about the past or the future. Just be constantly aware
that first is knowledge that I am the creator of the thought
and second that there are these different types of thoughts.
negative and waste thoughts are damaging. Waste thoughts
are a waste of energy and this waste, in turn, is followed by
further negative thoughts. The minute I go into the past, the
thoughts run along these lines: Oh! It should have been like this; 
it should not have been like that; Those days were better
they shouldn't have said this. If I go into the future, my thought
can be: When this happens then I will be happy. This means
now I am not happy. It's not a nice thought
SO: Now I understand why people say 'I didn't do anything
today why am I so tired?' If he had gone to play a game of
golf, he wouldn't have been so tired.
SS: Yes then the mind wouldn't have been creating so many
negative and waste thoughts, while it was concentrating on
something else
Forty to fifty thousand thoughts in a day! If they are not
of the right quality, what will happen to the system inside? A
psychiatrist will tell us that, on an average, 80 per cent of the
time the mind is in the past and 15 per cent of the time it is
in the future and so 95 per cent is gone as waste
SO: And out of the 80 per cent wonder how much is positive.
SS: There is nothing positive in the past because if it was a
pleasant past and I am thinking about it, then I am thinking
that those days were better. So there is nothing positive there.
People say it is good to have nice memories. Yes, it's a memory
but it's past. It's over. What is important is now.
SO: How often people speak about the past when you meet
them. You should have seen the salutes I received when I
was in the army, when I was a general; I was this; I was that
SS: What you are feeling inside right now is this: those were
the days when I got all of that from everybody, but today I
don't have that kind of attention. So, by saying all this about
my past, I am trying to seek attention from people around me.these are only words. We say very few words compared
to how much we think. There could be 25 to 30 thoughts per minute 
but not 25 to 30 sentences in the same time. One may not be using even 4 to 5 sentences in a minute. Every thought
has an effect on the entire system, on every cell of the body
Thoughts are the most powerful source of energy that we have,
so let's be careful about how we use them. It's like you possess
nuclear energy - you can use it for healing and you can use it
to destroy the world. The energy is the same. You have your
MRI, CT scan, etc., done with nuclear energy on one hand,
and you also have all the nuclear missiles on the other hand.
They are the same energy. Every form of energy can be used
for constructive as well as destructive purpose. It's the same
with thought energy. It can give and create love, peace, purity; it can give and create hatred, resentment, worry, anxiety. It's 
the same thought energy but the wonderful part is that these
are my thoughts, so I have a choice.
SO: I am still thinking about what you said just now about
every thought having an effect on my body. If I am going
to think thousands and thousands of thoughts in a day and
millions of thoughts in a month or my lifetime, what will
happen to my body?
SS: See, mostly for an illness the doctors will tell us it's
psychosomatic, that is the connection of the mind and the
body. So heal the mind, the body will follow. Of course
you must take care of the body, but it will not be of much use if
we take care only of the body and don't heal the mind. That's
why someone will say I am a strict vegetarian; I don't smoke;
I dont drink; I exercise every day, and yet I had a heart attack
in my 30s or 40s. That's because I took care only of the body,
while the mind was under stress.