SO: How important is a belief system for happiness?
SS: Every thought that I create gives rise to a feeling and
the feeling develops my attitude. The attitude comes out
as action; repeated action becomes habit; habit develops my
personality; and my personality determines my destiny. This
is the process from thought to destiny. The point is that every thought becomes very important. But what determines the
quality of my thought? Everyone is talking about positive
thinking, so why does the negative come so naturally the
minute there is a stimulus or a trigger? The factors that
determine the quality of our thoughts are past experiences,
information in which we saw the impact of media, television
newspaper early in the morning and late at night just before
going to sleep. These two play a very important role in the
quality of our thoughts. The third and the most important
factor is our belief system. Our body is like a computer, I the
soul is the operator, and the belief system is our operating
system. As will be the operating system, so will be the way
the software will run on the machine. We generally say this
software will run on this particular operating system, while
that one will not run on another operating system. This
machine is important, the operator is important, but the
operating system plays a very important role. At times there
could be a virus in the operating system, which is also a certain
belief system that may hamper the way I think and thereby
my destiny. Spirituality will help me to install an anti-virus.
Many people use a computer but do not install anti-virus in
the machine, so time and again the system tends to
get corrupt.
SO: They also don't see its expiry date.
SS: Yes, you need to update your operating system. What is
the sign that my system crashes once in a while? Outbursts of
anger, pain, or being hurt are signs of a system crash. It's time
to understand and check how often is my system crashing
in the whole day.
SO: But there are so many people who are irritable
throughout the day.
SS: And then they will say this is natural, this is my natural
behaviour, this is how I am.
SO: But they also insist that somebody else has passed
the virus on to them
SS: Even if someone passes the virus in me, it's still my
responsibility to have the anti-virus. No one else is going
to come and put the anti-virus. Times are getting tougher.
situations are getting challenging, people are becoming
increasingly unpredictable. Suppose I have known you for
years and suddenly there is a change in your temperament
and your behaviour changes. I have known you to behave in
a particular way and then suddenly I say I don't expect you
to behave like this. Let's say your nature is jovial and carefree
but suddenly you are confronted with an issue. You are going
through some conflict in your life and your temperament
changes. I am used to you talking to me very openly and light
heartedly. Now I can't understand why you have withdrawn
You are not communicating properly.
SO: So what is your duty and my duty then?
SS: My duty first will be to take care of myself and not get
hurt. You see, that is where friendships and relationships
suffer. If I get hurt first, then I am sitting and nursing my own
wounds. If I am hurt because you did not talk to me properly, 
I cannot help you. I take it personally and start feeling you
are angry with me. You do not respect me anymore. While I
am creating all this pain, I do not understand that it is not
about me, but your behaviour is because you are in pain for
some other reason. Since I am in pain, I will not be able to
help you to heal.
SO: But why is the other person's behaviour so important
for us?
SS: Public acceptance, appreciation and approval from people
around us. The magnitude will vary, but acceptance and
approval from people around us seems to be the foundation
of our self-esteem
SO: Why is it easier to misunderstand than understand?
SS: We misunderstand because we are hurt. We are in pain,
and when in pain we will never see the situation in the right
perspective.
SO: What you say is right but it's easier to misunderstand
than understand.
SS: Your shirt is white in colour. But if I wear different colour
glasses, it will appear a different colour to me every time.
You are who you are, but if there is a different colour, or
perspective every time because of my pain, my hurt, my ego,
you will appear different to me. So it's a misunderstanding.
Clean your own windows. Don't ask them to change their
shirt.
SO: That's what you meant by morning meditation and
before-sleep meditation. That is also part of cleansing.
SS: Absolutely. Any blockage, any negative thought, and I will
look at everyone through that window. If I have been hurt
because of something that happened with you and I am in
pain, I carry that pain with me to everyone, and I will see
everyone through that pain. If I have been rejected by you
and my self-esteem is low, my self-esteem will be low with
everyone. It's not that my self-esteem is low when I am with
you and high when I am with someone else.
SO: I think some people do make you feel comfortable.
They also raise your self-esteem.
SS: But we cannot be dependent on people to lower or raise
our self-esteem. If I find five people who can help me to raise
my self-esteem, I may find fifty who can bring it down.
SO: That is why people find their own comfort zone and
own groups and own people and own friends
SS: But who is the comfort zone? Even within family and
friends there are many who will lower our self-esteem
SO: So even within twenty family members we select
only four or five. I am comfortable here, but I am not
comfortable there because they lower my self-esteem.
Our topic itself is 'happiness unlimited', and here we are
limiting ourselves.
SS: Again, let's say being with you raises my self-esteem
because you accept me unconditionally. But you are able to do
that only when you are in a stable state of mind. Tomorrow
if you go through some problem, you lose your capacity to
accept me unconditionally
SO: Not only if I am in a problem. Suppose today
I accept you as you are, but tomorrow I do not like
what you do, then my behaviour towards you will
change.
SS: Absolutely. I was feeling very nice with you until today
but now I have to prove myself to you. And as soon as I start
to prove myself, there will be fear. Are you happy with me?
Have I been able to prove myself right? And because I am inthis constant process of proving, I am in fear and so I am
not sending the right energy
SO: In the final analysis we come back to the point that
one has to be independent.
SS: 'In-dependent': dependent only on that one who is
inside; let's not be 'out-dependent' because outside things
will change and they have a reason for changing.
SO: Does that make you a little recluse?
SS: Remember always that to heal and to help others, I will
have to be healed first. If I am healed, I will always be there
for other people; if I am not healed and I am in pain, I can
never be there for other people. I have to first take care of
myself to be there for others selflessly.
SO: So this is selfishness in a positive manner.
SS: This is the foundation for being selfless. Today even
when we are doing something for others, it is less with the
intention of giving and more with the intention of taking.
Even while doing for others we are satisfying some vacuum
within ourselves, so it is actually being selfish.
SO: So caring for the self is necessary so that we can
take care of the others.
SS: The equation flows this way only a healthy person will
be able to heal others, will be able to understand others
Without understanding my own thinking, my attitude, I
want to understand why you are feeling like this. How is it
possible? I am not ready to understand why I am hurt, but I
want to understand why you are upset. And the wonderful
part is when we understand how our mechanism works
understanding others becomes easy. If I am hurt I will
immediately be able to realize that I am hurt; I understand
the reason and check my attitude, now it's up to me how
much time I want to remain like that. If I am jealous, I will
immediately come to know that I am jealous. Now if I see
someone who is upset, I can go beyond the visible hurt to see
what must be happening inside for them to behave like this.
It becomes easier to be with people; you don't look only at
the criticism, you look at the dynamics inside this person's
mind for them to be so critical. So we just have to understand
our mechanism - then we can understand everyone else's.
SO: This remind me of an incident that happened in
the society where I live. One of the neighbours was
angry, shouting at everybody and ready to fight. I told
one of my friends, also a neighbour, that this person's
behaviour was obnoxious and that I could not stand
it. You know, this is what she said: 'what about him,
poor chap, look at what he must be undergoing! He
must be in some kind of pain to behave like that.' Now
I understand what she meant. Understanding others
is very difficult. If my wife's behaviour changes, I never
ask her if something is wrong. I just get irritated and
leave her alone to manage it herself. Why couldn't I ask
her if she needed any help?
SS: This is withdrawal. When we can't handle other peoples
temperaments, we withdraw. Even if it is temporary, even if it
is for one hour, when the other person is in pain we withdraw.
Think of your wife getting angry or behaving in a slightly
different manner;it could be a sign that she needs help. At
that time you move one step behind. You think when she is
fine you will come back, but that's the time when she needs
you more. It's because you are not able to take care of yourself
that you move away. This is not support; we are not there for
each other emotionally, though physically we are living in
the same house. We are not there to heal each other because
we have not healed ourselves.
Suppose you are sitting with a friend and your son walks
into the room; he has come from outside, doesn't wish you or
your friend who is sitting there, and he just walks past both
of you. What's the first thought that comes to the mind?
What's wrong with him? Where are his manners? What is my
friend going to think? He will think I haven't brought up my
son in the right way. Will the friend go out and tell others
how my son is? What will everyone else think about me?
So we are nursing our own wounds. My responsibility is to
not to question why the child is behaving like this, but see
what is the pain inside that caused him to behave like that.
Now you will go to his room and question his behaviour
Your child will request you to leave his room and leave him
alone. When the parent has been hurt or felt disrespected,
the child will not want to be with the parent. Right now the
child is in pain, and he doesn't want to be with anyone else
who is in pain.
You will love to meet somebody who is absolutely stable
and is accepting you unconditionally, extending unconditional support.
We don't get this from too many people, in fact from
hardly anybody. Unconditional acceptance means I do not
fluctuate irrespective of your temperament and I am not
judgmental about you. Then the energy that will flow from
anyone who accepts us unconditionally also helps us to heal
our wound.
SO: We fluctuate automatically. If you raise your voice,
I raise my voice; if you are soft, I am soft; if you smile, I
also smile. Such complicated lives we live.
SS: We keep changing our behaviour according to everyone
else. Because of this, we tend to forget our original qualities.
My sari is white in colour but if I meet somebody in red,
paint it red, when I meet somebody in black I paint it black,
and when I meet somebody in green I paint it green. At
the end of the day there is no white left. So where is my
personality? I coloured my personality according to everyone
else's personality. And it's actually not their personality either;
it's my perspective about their personality. We don't know
people as they actually are.
SO: Actually we are not capable of knowing.
SS: Because we are seeing them through our perspective.
There is only one person who knows me well and that's my
own self. No one can claim to say that they know me very
well - no, they know me through their perspective and that
perspective keeps changing
SO: So a child knows his father from his perspective.
SS: Absolutely. The same father will get along with his three
children in different ways because the children see the same
father in a different perspective. One might be very scared but
that's because he or she is weak; one could be very confident
and could run and get onto his lap; one will just stand in
the corner neither scared nor very confident. The father is
the same, though his nature and personality is the same.
So if one is comfortable, why are the others scared? One is
a meek personality, so he sees the same father through his
perspective.
SO: Let's consider a normal couple. If a
husband is tough, the wife says can't you be nice some
time, 'can't you speak softly, 'can't you be loving', and so
on. Conversely, if a person is very loving and soft, his
wife will say'can't you be tough sometimes, look at what
that fellow said to me'. Even from your perspective, you
are not happy with one kind of role your partner plays;
you want them to play different roles all the time.
SS: Because we have created an image of the right husband.
We get into a relationship with the image of an ideal partner
and an ideal friend, and then we spend our life time trying
to change our partner into that image. Let's say my image is
that of a partner who is an extrovert, dynamic and loud. But
I have a partner who is very soft and quiet, and an introvert.
According to me, this is not how my partner should be
So it's not about how he is as an individual; it's about what
image I created in my mind. I will keep on saying this is not
how you should be, you should be loud, you should be more
open, you should be like this, you should be like that. Then
if he becomes an extrovert, I will say, not that much, a little
less. So I want the person to be exactly the way I want him
to be. It's like going to a tailor who prepares your costume
according to the measurement that he prefers. He tells you
that now you have to change your body and fit into it. He
expects you to fit into the costume that he has made rather
than creating the costume according to your measurement.
And that's why we keep fluctuating. We keep changing
according to what everybody wants.
SO: We fluctuate because of them or because we are
not stable?
SS: What will happen if I meet ten people and I feel my
happiness is dependent on making these ten people happy?
They will all expect me to be a different kind of person. If
I keep changing, where is my original self? Inside I will get
suffocated because I am struggling to change.
SO: To come out of this struggle, not be suffocated, and
be stable, can we have some kind of a meditation?
SS: Actually in every system there is a core that never gets
corrupt. That's the consciousness. Meditation is the process
of passing those layers of belief system and reaching that core which is the spiritual energy.