SO: You have said life is a manifestation of
one's thoughts. You also mentioned astrologers and people
who predict your life or give you a ring or an amulet to wear.
SS: We need to understand it in the right perspective. Everything
that is guiding us in how to lead our lives or is predicting our
future - whether it's astrology, numerology, or some other
branch - is a science. People have studied that science over
a period of time and have acquired a sound understanding
for it. It's like a doctor who has studied the body. Let's say I
consult a doctor with my blood tests and he says there is a
probability that in the future I am at risk of getting diabetes. It's
an assessment based on my genetic factors, my current lifestyle
and on the present condition of my health. I go back home
with the new information. There are two ways of responding.
One, 'I am going to have diabetes; it's going to happen because
my mother has it, my grandmother has it; I have so much
stress and my lifestyle is very erratic. The doctor also says that
I am going to have diabetes. So if the doctor said that I can
get it in a year most likely if don't take the right measures
then with such a negative attitude, it is possible that I will get
it within six months. The stress that I create with the doctor's
information will precipitate the disease. Ultimately, I will say
that what the doctor said has turned out to be right.
The other option I have after I receive this information
is to take complete charge of myself. I bring about a shift in
my lifestyle, I start meditating, I start 'pranayam' and yoga. I
change my food habits and sleep timings. I start walking. I
take care of my emotions and then continue leading a holistic
lifestyle. There is a great chance that I will never have diabetes
and the assessment will not come true.
It's a response to an assessment acting like a prediction. The
probability was there, so that was pure science. There was a
probability of my getting diabetes, but it was still a probability;
not a reality. I picked up that probability as a warning signal
and brought about a shift in my lifestyle. The assessment was
then not true because I took charge. But if I dont take charge
and I just accept the probability as a reality, then it is going to
become the reality. I have accepted it already, I have created
anxiety and worry, and so it is going to happen because the
probability was already there.
In the same way, I go to an astrologer. He says based on
the planets, the moon, the stars, the positions right now, there
is a probability that this and this and this will happen in the
next six months or the next two years. There is a probability
of your physical health getting affected, of your business facing
some obstacles, of someone trying to harm you. It's only a
probability; it's not a reality yet. This is very important to
understand, that it's a probability predicted by someone who
understands the science. So we thank them for making this
prediction and giving us the probability, but now we take charge.
SO: So you mean to say we should take it as a warning and
then like we did for diabetes, modify our lifestyle, and see to
it that the prediction or the probability doesn't come true.
SS: Yes, but only if we have the power to listen to the information
and not get influenced by it. What happens unfortunately is
that when somebody gives us the prediction, we accept it as
reality. We say this is going to happen because the expert
has said this, and the expert's predictions for so many people
have come true. It's going to come true in my case as well.
We have already converted the probability into a reality. Our
mind accepts it that this is going to happen. Thoughts create
destiny and so it happens.
SO: Earlier the expert's predictions might have come true
many times. So that may be a reason for us to believe in him.
SS: True, because its pure science and there is nothing wrong
about the prediction. It's a probability for the one for whom
that prediction was made; that person accepted the prediction
as reality. His mind accepted it, so it manifested as reality
SO: But don't you think that knowing the prediction will
change the destiny?
SS: There are two ways. Let's say someone predicts for me
my next six months are going to be very challenging; the
planetary movements are not favourable. Whatever I do, I am
not going to be successful. It's a prediction. If I don't know this
prediction, I don't know this piece of information. So I put in
all my efforts, obstacles come but I overcome them, because
I am all motivated to work. I want success and I am working
for success. Obstacles come but I don't get demotivated. The
other option is I know the prediction that success is difficult
to achieve in the next six months because planet movements
are not favourable for me. The information is so powerful for
me that I am not able to raise my thoughts beyond it. I start
my business but I say 'what's the use, I know its not going to
be successful in these six months. Whatever I do there is
going to be a problem. Even when I am faced with the smallest
obstacles, I say that this was going to happen, and I lose my
enthusiasm needed to overcome the obstacle.
SO: So, it is safer not to have this piece of information.
SS: Either you don't take the prediction, or if you know the
prediction then raise your thoughts beyond it, and go above
that prediction. Take it as a challenge.
SO: I am peace; I am bliss; I am knowledge; I am powerful.
SS: Absolutely. Now where is the obstacle? The obstacle can
be only something outside. The only thing that is required to
face an obstacle is stability inside.
SO: Even a child falls so many times before he learns how
to walk.
SS: The important thing is that when he falls, he gets up and
starts walking again. Now let's suppose somebody has predicted
that you are not going to get up for the next six months, try
walking how ever much you want, you are only going to fall.
The first time you fall, you say 'forget it, I will try after six
months because so-and-so has told me that these six months
I cannot walk' So you don't even try with the right energy
and because you don't create the right thoughts, you don't get
the right destiny.
On hearing the prediction we ask them for a solution, so
that we can be successful in these six months. Then we are
told wear this particular colour, wear this particular stone.
What happens? Do the planets change? No, they are still there.
But we are doing something that is helping us to change our
thoughts. First we had the information that these six months
would not go right for us, and so we were demotivated. Now
we have the information that if we wear this particular stone,
success is certain. We create the thought that I am wearing
the stone and now let any obstacle come, I am going to cross
it. I will get through the phase while I wear this stone.
SO: People talk about the rays of the Sun passing through
the stone and going inside the skin. What about that?
SS: I, the being, is energy. I have vibrations. As will be the
qualities of the being, love, peace, purity, so will be the aura
of the person. The photographs of deities always feature a
white light around the head; it's a symbol of the purity of
the soul. So if the soul is pure, the aura is white. If there is
some conflict somewhere, the aura is not going to be white
or cream or yellow - it could be red, blue, or grey. By using
an outside stimulus, we try to change the colour of the aura,
which then will have an effect on the mind. So we are going
from outside to inside. "The easiest way will be to change my
thought; automatically the aura will change, vibrations will
change, situation will change.
SO: Basically the colours and stones are changing our aura?
SS: Yes, these too work, but how much, to what extent and
for how much time? Someone tells you to wear a red colour
shirt and things will be better; how often can one wear a red
colour shirt? Why not just create powerful thoughts instead?
We always thought that the easiest method was to change
something outside so as to experience a change inside; its
actually about changing something inside to experience results
outside. The process is inside out, not outside in. The inside
is in my control and is a permanent change.
SO: When you do it from outside, you do not have complete
control. People who predict something are not entirely right.
It happens often that you will call them and say that you
said this to me but it didn't happen, he will probably say,
"Sir, I am also a human being and cannot always be correct".
SS: They were not predicting reality; they were predicting
a probability. We have to remember this. We have no right
to say anything to them. A probability will always have a
percentage. They may even predict that your next six months
will be very nice, but if you are demotivated inside, nothing is
going to be smooth. So the prediction is going to be wrong.
We have been discussing about the effect of external
influences on our mind. We are practicing to enable our mind
to go beyond the influence of situations, objects and people. If 
my mind can go beyond the influence of situations and people,
then we can also go beyond the influence of planets. Planets
are also an external influence. They do have an influence, but
it is up to us whether to get overpowered by it, or to rise
above the influence. When we are weak internally, everything
will have an influence; someones smallest word will disturb me 
because I am weak. The mind doesn't have the power to
cope with, accommodate and pack up all the thoughts, so
your one word can upset me for the next one day or for the
next six months. If your one word can upset me for the next
six months, the planets' movement can also upset me for the
next six months. It is all about rising above external influences.
SO: Basically it is on me, whether I should be disturbed
or not.
SS: Yes. You know it's like this room is in so-and-so direction,
so the husband and wife will never get along well in this
room; change your bedroom, change the particular wrong
direction into the right direction as directed by the expert
But is it necessary that everyone whose house is in the right
direction has a good relationship? No. If this had to work,
then everyone would just change the direction of their house,
wear the stones, and all would be bliss. Many of us are doing
all of that, then why is there so much pain and failure?
SO: But it has worked for people.
SS: For some time. They create the thought 'I have done this
now my relationship will work' Six months down the line, they
would have forgotten that they changed the direction of their
house. North, south, east, west, these are energies, magnetic
fields. It is a field and it will have its effect, but the highest field
is here (in the mind). If we say that we can get along with each
other come what may - north, east, south, west and then
we actually can get along. We can then get along even in the
wrong direction of the house. And if we cannot get along, then
we cannot do so even in the best designed house. It's about
the mind ready to take the challenge. We cannot always keep
changing everything outside; okay, I can change the house.
can I change you? I can only change the way I think.
SO: But they will give you good examples of how this
direction has got energy
SS: Because it's science; there is no doubt about that. But there
is a science, an energy that is much higher than the energy
of alphabets, numbers and planets. It is my own energy, the
energy of consciousness.
SO: Am I not weak here, when I use some other energy? I
have a much stronger energy within me?
SS: I can't take charge of my mind, so I take charge of everything
else outside. What time I should begin my business; in which
direction should my office be; which stone should I wear;
which symbol should be put in my office. I can just take care
of everything around me because I don't have the power to
take care of my thoughts.
SO: I have the bigger power here within and I am going
with a begging bowl to smaller powers.
SS: The weaker we become, the more we will go outside. The 
lesser control I have on myself, the more my power is reducing 
because I am not taking care. If you don't discipline your child 
at the right time, he will get spoilt eventually.
SO: What is the care one should take?
SS: Discipline the mind, be aware, take care, and choose the
right thought.
SO: Somewhere it is very important to understand who I
am, how powerful I am. If I am peace, I don't say 'want'
anymore.
SS: Yes, I dont have to do anything to be peaceful.
SO: Then I don't say 'please give me some power?' I am
power, I am knowledge. If I am so much, and there is such
abundance, why will I need anything?
SS: We will not, at least not anything external. Everything
external is needed for physical comfort; it's needed for fun, for
excitement, for entertainment, but not for peace and happiness.
SO: So if I am going for a holiday. What should be my
thoughts? Earlier I used to get disappointed that I took
my family for a holiday to make them happy, but my child
came back unhappy.
SS: Be happy and then go for the holiday. Not go for the
holiday to be happy.
Because I am not going on the holiday for happiness; I am
going just for fun, for a change from the daily routine. That's
all that a holiday is. So the holiday will not be for pursuing
happiness; it will be for expressing and sharing the happiness
that we are filled with. The perspective changes from taking
to giving, so then we look forward to meeting people, we look
lorward to being with everybody, so that we can radiate our
happiness to them, not so that they can make us happy.
I am a peaceful and happy being, but I get to experience it
and express it only when I am in interaction with someone. If
I am sitting by myself, I don't get to express or experience my
own qualities, and that's why relationships are so important,
Unless I am in interaction, unless I have this exchange of
energy, I will not be expressing and experiencing. I experience
my quality only when it comes out. When I give anger to
you, first I experience it; similarly, when I give peace to you,
first I experience it. I get to experience it only when I am in
interaction with someone and so I look forward to going to
work; I look forward to meeting families and friends - not
for wanting but for expressing and experiencing, and therefore
sharing.
SO: How much lighter one must be feeling when he is not
doing it artificially and things are just happening! See this
difference between doing and happening.
SS: We are 'human beings' but today we have become 'human
doings'. We are doing so many things. We are human beings
so let us be what we are supposed to be first. Spirituality says
'be happy and do this, because you are a 'human being doing
action'.
